A Universe From Nothing: Why There Is Something Rather Than Nothing

Of course, one can ask, and many do, “Where do the laws of physics come from?” as well as more suggestively, “Who created these laws?” Even if one can answer this first query, the petitioner will then often ask, “But where did that come from?” or “Who created that?” and so 
Note: Bra intro till essé

Who created the creator?” After all, what is the difference between arguing in favor of an eternally existing creator versus an eternally existing universe without one?


theories that underlie much of modern physics—all suggest that getting something from nothing is not a problem. Indeed, something from nothing may have been required for the universe to come into being. Moreover, all signs suggest that this is how our universe could have arisen.


But therein, in my opinion, lies the intellectual bankruptcy of much of theology and some of modern philosophy. For surely “nothing” is every bit as physical as “something,” especially if it is to be defined as the “absence of something.” It then behooves us to understand precisely the physical nature of both these quantities. And without science, any definition is just words.


Again, I suspect it would have been . . . at one time. But, as I shall describe, we have learned that space and time can themselves spontaneously appear, so now we are told that even this “nothing” is not really the nothing that matters.

After all, if there were no potential for creation, then God couldn’t have created anything. It would be semantic hocus-pocus to assert that the potentially infinite regression is avoided because God exists outside nature and, therefore, the “potential” for existence itself is not a part of the nothingness from which existence arose.

While it is trivial mathematically to do so, once this term is on the right-hand side, where all the terms contributing to the energy of the universe reside, it represents something completely different from a physical perspective—namely a new contribution to the total energy. But what kind of stuff could contribute such a term?
 The answer is, nothing.
 By nothing, I do not mean nothing, but rather nothing—in this case, the nothingness we normally call empty space. That is to say, if I take a region of space and get rid of everything within it—dust, gas, people, and even the radiation passing through, namely absolutely everything within that region—if the remaining empty space weighs something, then that would correspond to the existence of a cosmological term such as Einstein invented.
 Now, this makes Einstein’s cosmological constant seem even crazier! For any fourth grader will tell you how much energy is contained in nothing, even if they don’t know what energy is. The answer must be nothing.


What all this implies is that, for very short times, so short that you cannot measure their speed with high precision, quantum mechanics allows for the possibility that these particles act as if they are moving faster than light! But, if they are moving faster than light, Einstein tells us they must be behaving as if they are moving backward in time!
 Feynman was brave enough to take this apparently crazy possibility seriously and explore its implications. He drew the following diagram for an electron moving about, periodically speeding up in the middle of its voyage to faster-than-light speed.

If this doesn’t bother you, then consider the following: for a little while, even if you start out with just a single particle, and end with a single particle, for a short time there are three particles moving about:
  
 In the brief middle period, for at least a little while, something has spawned out of nothing! Feynman beautifully describes this apparent paradox in his 1949 paper, “A Theory of Positrons,” with a delightful wartime analogy:  
 It is as though a bombardier watching a single road through the bomb-sight of a low-flying plane suddenly sees three roads and it is only when two of them come together and disappear again that he realizes that he has simply passed over a long switchback in a single road.  
 As long as this time period during this “switchback” is so short that we cannot measure all the particles directly, quantum mechanics and relativity imply that not only is this weird situation allowed, it is required. The particles that appear and disappear in timescales too short to measure are called virtual particles.

After all of this work, we now have a good picture of what the inside of a proton actually looks like. There may be three quarks contained therein, but there is also a lot of other stuff. In particular, virtual particles reflecting the particles and fields that convey the strong force between quarks are popping in and out of existence all the time.

In principle, particles can therefore carry almost infinite energy as long as they disappear in almost infinitesimally short times.


. As I have described already, the laws of quantum mechanics imply that, on very small scales, for very short times, empty space can appear to be a boiling, bubbling brew of virtual particles and fields wildly fluctuating in magnitude. 

However, during inflation, these quantum fluctuations can determine when what would otherwise be different small regions of space end their period of exponential expansion. As different regions stop inflating at slightly (microscopically) different times, the density of matter and radiation that results when the false vacuum energy gets released as heat energy in these different regions is slightly different in each one.
 The pattern of density fluctuations that result after inflation—arising, I should stress, from the quantum fluctuations in otherwise empty space—turns out to be precisely in agreement with the observed pattern of cold spots and hot spots on large scales in the cosmic microwave background radiation. While consistency is not proof, of course, there is an increasing view among cosmologists that, once again, if it walks like a duck and looks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it is probably a duck. And if inflation indeed is responsible for all the small fluctuations in the density of matter and radiation that would later result in the gravitational collapse of matter into galaxies and stars and planets and people, then it can be truly said that we all are here today because of quantum fluctuations in what is essentially nothing.
 This is so remarkable I want to stress it again. Quantum fluctuations, which otherwise would have been completely invisible, get frozen by inflation and emerge afterward as density fluctuations that produce everything we can see! If we are all stardust, as I have written, it is also true, if inflation happened, that we all, literally, emerged from quantum nothingness.


And the average total Newtonian gravitational energy of each object in our universe is equal to nothing. Enjoy the thought while you can, if you are so inclined, because, if all this is true, we live in perhaps the worst of all universes one can live in, at least as far as the future of life is concerned.


The structures we can see, like stars and galaxies, were all created by quantum fluctuations from nothing. 

Recall that the domination of the expansion of our universe by the energy of seemingly empty space was inferred from the fact that this expansion is speeding up. And, just as with inflation, as described in the last chapter, our observable universe is at the threshold of expanding faster than the speed of light. And with time, because of the accelerated expansion, things will only get worse.
 This means that, the longer we wait, the less we will be able to see. Galaxies that we can now see will one day in the future be receding away from us at faster-than-light speed, which means that they will become invisible to us. The light they emit will not be able to make progress against the expansion of space, and it will never again reach us. These galaxies will have disappeared from our horizon.


Only in the first seconds of a hot Big Bang, with an initial abundance of protons and neutrons that would result in something very close to the observed density of matter in visible galaxies today, and a density of radiation that would leave a remnant that would correspond precisely to the observed intensity of the cosmic microwave background radiation today, would nuclear reactions occur that could produce precisely the abundance of light elements, hydrogen and deuterium, helium and lithium, that we infer to have comprised the basic building blocks of the stars that now fill the night sky.



 I should point out, nevertheless, that even though incomplete data can lead to a false picture, this is far different from the (false) picture obtained by those who choose to ignore empirical data to invent a picture of creation that would otherwise contradict the evidence of reality (young earthers, for example), or those who instead require the existence of something for which there is no observable evidence whatsoever (like divine intelligence) to reconcile their view of creation with their a priori prejudices, or worse still, those who cling to fairy tales about nature that presume the answers before questions can even be asked.

For those who find it remarkable that we live in a universe of Something, just wait. Nothingness is heading on a collision course right toward us!” 

But the discovery that empty space has energy started a revision in thinking among many physicists about what is required in nature and what may be accidental.
 The catalyst for this new gestalt originates from the argument I gave in the last chapter: dark energy is measurable today because “now” is the only time in the history of the universe when the energy in empty space is comparable to the energy density in matter.
 Why should we be living at such a “special” time in the history of the universe? Indeed, this flies in the face of everything that has characterized science since Copernicus. We have learned that the Earth is not the center of the solar system and that the Sun is a star on the lonely outer edges of a galaxy that is merely one out of 400 billion galaxies in the observable universe. We have come to accept the “Copernican principle” that there is nothing special about our place and time in the universe.
 But with the energy of empty space being what it is, we do appear to live at a special time. This is shown best by the following illustration of a “brief history of time.”

So, in a universe with an energy of empty space merely 50 times bigger than that we observe, apparently no one would have been around today to try to measure the energy.
 Could this be telling us something? Shortly after the discovery of our accelerating universe, physicist Steven Weinberg proposed, based on an argument he had developed more than a decade earlier—before the discovery of dark energy—that the “Coincidence Problem” could therefore be solved if perhaps the value of the cosmological constant that we measure today were somehow “anthropically” selected. That is, if somehow there were many universes, and in each universe the value of the energy of empty space took a randomly chosen value based on some probability distribution among all possible energies, then only in those universes in which the value is not that different from what we measure would life as we know it be able to evolve. So maybe we find ourselves in a universe with a tiny energy in empty space because we couldn’t find ourselves in one with a much larger value. Put another way, it is not too surprising to find that we live in a universe in which we can live!
 This argument, however, makes mathematical sense only if there is a possibility that many different universes have arisen. Talking about many different universes can sound like an oxymoron. After all, traditionally the notion of universe has become synonymous with “everything that exists.”

The minute one chooses this definition for a universe, the possibility of other “universes”—regions that have always been and always will be causally disconnected from ours, like islands separated from any communication with one another by an ocean of space—becomes possible, at least in principle.
 Our universe is so vast that, as I have emphasized, something that is not impossible is virtually guaranteed to occur somewhere within it. Rare events happen all the time. You might wonder whether the same principle applies to the possibility of many universes, or a multiverse, as the idea is now known. It turns out that the theoretical situation is actually stronger than simply a possibility. A number of central ideas that drive much of the current activity in particle theory today appear to require a multiverse.
 I want to stress this because, in discussions with those who feel the need for a creator, the existence of a multiverse is viewed as a cop-out conceived by physicists who have run out of answers—or perhaps questions. This may eventually be the case, but it is not so now. Almost every logical possibility we can imagine regarding extending laws of physics as we know them, on small scales, into a more complete theory, suggests that, on large scales, our universe is not unique.


In any case, what Linde recognized is that, while quantum fluctuations during inflation may often push the field that drives inflation toward its lowest energy state, and thus provide a graceful exit, there is always the possibility that, in some regions, quantum fluctuations will drive the field toward yet higher energies, and hence away from values where inflation will end, so that inflation will continue unabated. Because such regions will expand for longer periods of time, there will be far more space that is inflating than that which is not. Within these regions, quantum fluctuations again will drive some subregions to exit inflation and thus stop expanding exponentially, but again there will be regions where quantum fluctuations will cause inflation to persist even longer. And so on.
 This picture, which Linde dubbed “chaotic inflation,” indeed resembles more familiar chaotic systems on Earth. Take boiling oatmeal, for example. At any point a bubble of gas may burst from the surface, reflecting regions where liquid at high temperature completes a phase transition to form a vapor. But between the bubbles the oatmeal is roiling and flowing. On large scales there is regularity—there are always bubbles popping somewhere. But locally, things are quite different depending upon where one looks. So it would be in a chaotically inflating 

 this picture, inflation is eternal. Some regions, indeed most of space, will go on inflating forever. Those regions that exit inflation will become separate, causally disconnected universes. I want to stress that a multiverse is inevitable if inflation is eternal, and eternal inflation is by far the most likely possibility in most, if not all, inflationary scenarios. As Linde put it in his 1986 paper:  
 The old question why our universe is the only possible one is now replaced by the question in which theories [of] the existence of mini-universes of our type [are] possible. This question is still very difficult, but it is much easier than the previous one. In our opinion, the modification of the point of view on the global structure of the universe and on our place in the world is one of the most important consequences of the development of the inflationary universe scenario.  

? Maybe all of the mysteries of particle theory can be solved by invoking the same mantra: if the universe were any other way, we could not live in it.


. The other conclusion is that the laws themselves are all that exist. These laws themselves require our universe to come into existence, to develop and evolve, and we are an irrevocable by-product of these laws. The laws may be eternal, or they too may have come into existence, again by some yet unknown but possibly purely physical process.

And here, I think it is extremely significant that a universe from nothing—in a sense I will take pains to describe—that arises naturally, and even inevitably, is increasingly consistent with everything we have learned about the world. This learning has not come from philosophical or theological musings about morality or other speculations about the human condition. It is instead based on the remarkable and exciting developments in empirical cosmology and particle physics that I have described.


Occam’s razor suggests that, if some event is physically plausible, we don’t need recourse to more extraordinary claims for its being.

Consider an electron-positron pair that spontaneously pops out of empty space near the nucleus of an atom and affects the property of that atom for the short time the pair exists. In what sense did the electron or positron exist before? Surely by any sensible definition they didn’t. 

: in a flat universe, and only in a flat universe, the average Newtonian gravitational energy of every object participating in the expansion is precisely zero.
 I emphasize that this was a falsifiable postulate. It didn’t have to be this way. Nothing required this except theoretical speculations based on considerations of a universe that could have arisen naturally from nothing, or at the very least, from almost nothing.


Just as Darwin, albeit reluctantly, removed the need for divine intervention in the evolution of the modern world, teeming with diverse life throughout the planet (though he left the door open to the possibility that God helped breathe life into the first forms), our current understanding of the universe, its past, and its future make it more plausible that “something” can arise out of nothing without the need for any divine guidance. Because of the observational and related theoretical difficulties associated with working out the details, I expect we may never achieve more than plausibility in this regard. But plausibility itself, in my view, is a tremendous step forward as we continue to marshal the courage to live meaningful lives in a universe that likely came into existence, and may fade out of existence, without purpose, and certainly without us at its center.


I would now like to describe how, if our universe arose from nothing, a flat universe, one with zero total Newtonian gravitational energy of every object, is precisely what we should expect. The argument is a little subtle—subtler than I have been able to describe in my popular lectures on the subject—so I am happy to have the space here to carefully try to lay it out.
 First, I want to be clear about what kind of “nothing” I am discussing at the moment. This is the simplest version of nothing, namely empty space. For the moment, I will assume space exists, with nothing at all in it, and that the laws of physics also exist. Once again, I realize that in the revised versions of nothingness that those who wish to continually redefine the word so that no scientific definition is practical, this version of nothing doesn’t cut the mustard. However, I suspect that, at the times of Plato and Aquinas, when they pondered why there was something rather than nothing, empty space with nothing in it was probably a good approximation of what they were thinking about.


Therefore, our observable universe can start out as a microscopically small region of space, which can be essentially empty, and still grow to enormous scales containing eventually lots of matter and radiation, all without costing a drop of energy, with enough matter and radiation to account for everything we see today!


suggestive that our universe arose though a process like that of inflation, a process whereby the energy of empty space (nothing) gets converted into the energy of something, during a time when the universe is driven closer and closer to being essentially exactly flat on all observable scales.
 While inflation demonstrates how empty space endowed with energy can effectively create everything we see, along with an unbelievably large and flat universe, it would be disingenuous to suggest that empty space endowed with energy, which drives inflation, is really nothing. In this picture one must assume that space exists and can store energy, and one uses the laws of physics like general relativity to calculate the consequences. So if we stopped here, one might be justified in claiming that modern science is a long way from really addressing how to get something from nothing. This is just the first step, however. As we expand our understanding, we will next see that inflation can represent simply the tip of a cosmic iceberg of nothingness.



The existence of energy in empty space—the discovery that rocked our cosmological universe and the idea that forms the bedrock of inflation—only reinforces something about the quantum world that was already well established in the context of the kinds of laboratory experiments I have already described. Empty space is complicated. It is a boiling brew of virtual particles that pop in and out of existence in a time so short we cannot see them directly.
 Virtual particles are manifestations of a basic property of quantum systems. At the heart of quantum mechanics is a rule that sometimes governs politicians or CEOs—as long as no one is watching, anything goes. Systems continue to move, if just momentarily, between all possible states, including states that would not be allowed if the system were actually being measured. These “quantum fluctuations” imply something essential about the quantum world: nothing always produces something, if only for an instant.


consider the electric field emanating from a charged object. It is definitely real. You can feel the static electric force on your hair or watch a balloon stick to a wall. However, the quantum theory of electromagnetism suggests that the static field is due to the emission, by the charged particles involved in producing the field, of virtual photons that have essentially zero total energy. These virtual particles, because they have zero energy, can propagate across the universe without disappearing, and the field due to the superposition of many of them is so real it can be felt.


Outside of the core of black holes is a radius called the “event horizon.” Inside an event horizon, no object can classically escape because the escape velocity exceeds the speed of light. Thus, even light emitted inside this region will not make it outside the event horizon.
 Now imagine a particle-antiparticle pair nucleates out of empty space just outside of the event horizon due to quantum fluctuations in that region. It is possible, if one of the particles actually falls within the event horizon, for it to lose enough gravitational energy by falling into the black hole that this energy exceeds twice the rest mass of either particle. This means that the partner particle can fly off to infinity and be observable without any violation of energy conservation. The total positive energy associated with the radiated particle is more than compensated by the loss of energy experienced by its partner particle falling into the black hole. The black hole can therefore radiate particles.


Nevertheless, all of these phenomena imply that, under the right conditions, not only can nothing become something, it is required to.


As a result, what might otherwise seem a small accomplishment (establishing a small asymmetry at early times) might instead be considered almost as the moment of creation. Because once an asymmetry between matter and antimatter was created, nothing could later put it asunder. The future history of a universe full of stars and galaxies was essentially written. Antimatter particles would annihilate with the matter particles in the early universe, and the remaining excess of matter particles would survive through the present day, establishing the character of the visible universe we know and love and inhabit.
 Even if the asymmetry were 1 part in a billion there would be enough matter left over to account for everything we see in the universe today. In fact, an asymmetry of 1 part in a billion or so is precisely what was called for, because today there are roughly 1 billion photons in the cosmic microwave background for every proton in the universe. The CMBR photons are the remnants, in this picture, of the early matter-antimatter annihilations near the beginning of time.


 it could have gone either way, was it then just a circumstantial accident that our universe became dominated by matter? Imagine standing on top of a tall mountain and tripping. The direction you fall was not preordained, but rather is an accident, depending upon which direction you were looking in or at what point in your stride you tripped. Perhaps similarly our universe is like that, and even if the laws of physics are fixed, the ultimate direction of the asymmetry between matter and antimatter was driven by some random initial condition (just as in the case of tripping down the mountain, the law of gravity is fixed and determines that you will fall, but your direction may be an accident). Once again, our very existence in that case would be an environmental accident.


. After describing how a matter-antimatter asymmetry might plausibly be generated in the early universe based on our new understanding of particle physics, he added a note that this provided one way of thinking about the answer to the question of why there is something rather than nothing: nothing is unstable.

One can speculate that the universe began in the most symmetrical state possible and that in such a state no matter existed; the universe was a vacuum. A second state existed, and in it matter existed. The second state had slightly less symmetry, but was also lower in energy. Eventually a patch of less symmetrical phase appeared and grew rapidly. The energy released by the transition found form in the creation of particles. This event might be identified with the big bang . . . The answer to the ancient question “Why is there something rather than nothing?” would be that “nothing” is unstable.  

Stephen Hawking was one of the first scientists to fully exploit this idea to the possible quantum mechanics of space-time (the union of our three-dimensional space along with one dimension of time to form a four-dimensional unified space-time system, as required by Einstein’s special theory of relativity). The virtue of Feynman’s methods was that focusing on all possible paths ends up meaning that the results can be shown to be independent of the specific space and time labels one applies to each point on each path. Because relativity tells us that different observers in relative motion will measure distance and time differently and therefore assign different values to each point in space and time, having a formalism that is independent of the different labels that different observers might assign to each point in space and time is particularly useful.
 And it is most useful perhaps in considerations of general relativity, where the specific labeling of space and time points becomes completely arbitrary, so that different observers at different points in a gravitational field measure distances and times differently, and all that ultimately determines the behavior of systems are geometric quantities like curvature, which turn out to be independent of all such labeling schemes.
 As I have alluded to several times, general relativity is not fully consistent with quantum mechanics, at least as far as we can tell, and therefore there is no completely unambiguous method to define Feynman’s sum-over-paths technique in general relativity. So we have to make some guesses in advance based on plausibility and check to see if the results make 

But let’s consider even stranger possibilities. Remember that, in the quantum theory of electromagnetism, particles can pop out of empty space at will as long as they disappear again on a time frame determined by the Uncertainty Principle. By analogy, then, in the Feynman quantum sum over possible space-time configurations, should one consider the possibility of small, possibly compact spaces that themselves pop in and out of existence? More generally, what about spaces that may have “holes” in them, or “handles” like donuts dunking into space-time?
 These are open questions. However, unless one can come up with a good reason for excluding such configurations from the quantum mechanical sum that determines the properties of the evolving universe, and to date no such good reason exists that I know of, then under the general principle that holds everywhere else I know of in nature—namely that anything that is not proscribed by the laws of physics must actually happen—it seems most reasonable to consider these possibilities.




1. In quantum gravity, universes can, and indeed always will, spontaneously appear from nothing. Such universes need not be empty, but can have matter and radiation in them, as long as the total energy, including the negative energy associated with gravity, is zero.
 2. In order for the closed universes that might be created through such mechanisms to last for longer than infinitesimal times, something like inflation is necessary. As a result, the only long-lived universe one might expect to live in as a result of such a scenario is one that today appears flat, just as the universe in which we live appears.
 The lesson is clear: quantum gravity not only appears to allow universes to be created from nothing—meaning, in this case, I emphasize, the absence of space and time—it may require them. “Nothing”—in this case no space, no time, no anything!—is unstable.


There, “nothing” meant empty but preexisting space combined with fixed and well-known laws of physics. Now the requirement of space has been removed.


We may wish to apply similar reasoning to the creation of our universe. All of the examples I have provided thus far indeed involve creation of something from what one should be tempted to consider as nothing, but the rules for that creation, i.e., the laws of physics, were preordained. Where do the rules come from?
 There are two possibilities. Either God, or some divine being who is not bound by the rules, who lives outside of them, determines them—either by whim or with malice aforethought—or they arise by some less supernatural mechanism.
 The problem with God determining the rules is that you can at least ask what, or who, determined God’s rules. Traditionally the response to this is to say that God is, among the Creator’s many other spectacular attributes, the cause of all causes, in the language of the Roman Catholic Church, or the First Cause (as per Aquinas), or in the language of Aristotle, moving the prime mover.


One thing is certain, however. The metaphysical “rule,” which is held as an ironclad conviction by those with whom I have debated the issue of creation, namely that “out of nothing nothing comes,” has no foundation in science. 

Moreover, those who argue that out of nothing nothing comes seem perfectly content with the quixotic notion that somehow God can get around this. But once again, if one requires that the notion of true nothingness requires not even the potential for existence, then surely God cannot work his wonders, because if he does cause existence from nonexistence, there must have been the potential for existence. To simply argue that God can do what nature cannot is to argue that supernatural potential for existence is somehow different from regular natural potential for existence. 

Quantum mechanics was developed from 1912 to 1927, primarily through the work of the brilliant and iconic Danish physicist Niels Bohr and the brilliant young hot-shots Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger and German physicist Werner Heisenberg. The quantum world first proposed by Bohr, and refined mathematically by Schrödinger and Heisenberg, defies all commonsense notions based on our experience with objects on a human scale. Bohr first proposed that electrons in atoms orbit around the central nucleus, as planets do around the Sun, but demonstrated that the observed rules of atomic spectra (the frequencies of light emitted by different elements) could only be understood if somehow the electrons were restricted to have stable orbits in a fixed set of “quantum levels” and could not spiral freely toward the nucleus. They could move between levels by absorbing or emitting only discrete frequencies, or quanta, of light—the very quanta that Max Planck had first proposed in 1905 as a way of understanding the forms of radiation emitted by hot objects.


