Afterlives

  That was the story Khalifa’s father told him about his own struggles as a child. He told him because that is what fathers do to their children and because he wanted the boy to want more. 

Khalifa did not suspect with what nostalgia he would remember those days in later life.






The names were like music to many people who lived in the town, perhaps because most of them had not been to any of them. It was not that they could not imagine that they were all probably places of hardship and struggle and poverty, just like everywhere else, but they could not resist the strange beauty of those names.
    The old

boma

demurred

commiseration.

It was her aunt who told her she must never go up the hill, and also told stories about a snake that could swallow a child, and a tall man whose shadow flitted across the roofs of houses when the moon was full, and a dishevelled old woman who roamed the road to the sea and sometimes took the form of a leopard who raided the village for a goat or a baby.





them. 

In the deep silence of the night she heard soft hissing whispers creeping down and sometimes they came around and behind the house as well. Her aunt told her these were the invisibles which only women heard, but however sad and insistent their whispers she was not to open the door to

them.

If she spoke while her head was in the tank her voice had a demonic sound, which made her feel enormous. She did that sometimes even when she was not fetching water, put her head into the tank and made gloating, groaning sounds as if she was huge. 

Some of these stories were terrifying, like the one about a ragged bloated man with long dirty fingernails who walked on the road at night, dragging an iron chain behind him, looking to capture a little girl and take her to his burrow underground. You can always hear him coming because of the chain dragging on the ground. Many of her aunt’s stories were about dirty old people who stole little girls. 

Her aunt had a habit of nodding several times when she wanted to say something firmly, and because her face was narrow and drawn and her nose was pointed, she looked as if she was pecking at something in the air when she did so. 





She could feel something in her shrinking and turning edgy as if constantly expecting a scolding. There was so much that she was now not allowed to do because it was improper. She was not to touch a boy’s or a man’s hand even in greeting. She was not to speak to a boy or a man in the street unless he spoke to her and was someone she knew. She was not to smile at a stranger, and always to walk with her eyes cast slightly downwards to avoid accidental eye contact. 

Musen-Almanach für das Jahr 1798.

now it’s just where our betters store what we can’t afford

That wind brought the traders’ ships back from across the ocean. Their true destination was Mombasa or Zanzibar, prosperous towns with rich merchants ready to trade, but some of them straggled into other port towns, including theirs. The arrival of the ships was anticipated weeks in advance, and popular legends of captains and crew were revived and circulated once again: the chaos they brought 

and turned it into a campsite, the fabulous merchandise they hawked through the streets, a lot of it trinkety but some of it valuable beyond the vendors’ awareness, the thick rugs and rare perfumes, the shiploads of dates and salted kingfish and dried shark that they sold as job lots to the merchants, their notorious hunger for fruit and for mangoes in particular, and their unruly violence, which in the past had led to open battles in the streets and forced people to lock themselves in their houses in terror. The sailors filled the mosques to overflowing, and perfumed the air with their sea-salted, sweat-stained kanzus and kofias, which were often tarnished brown with grime. The area around the port bore the brunt of their excesses. The timber yard and Khalifa’s house were some distance into the town, and the only travellers who came their way were the street hawkers with their baskets

of gum and spices and perfume and necklaces and brass trinkets and thick-woven cloths dyed and embroidered in medieval colours. Sometimes high-stepping Suri merchants who had lost their way came marching through the neighbourhood, swinging their canes high as if they were crossing enemy territory. Children trooped behind them, calling out mocking words the strangers did not understand and making farting noises with their mouths, which the Suri were reputed to find especially insulting.
    If the timber yard and Khalifa’s house were a little out of the way for the traders and sailors, the open ground in front of the warehouses was not. They congregated there every day, and some of them camped there during the night. Sellers of fruit and grilled maize and cassava and coffee followed them there and transformed the area to something like the

buzzing tumultuous marketplace Khalifa had so longingly described to Hamza so many months before.

He tried to maintain a line between being a servant, which he did not wish to be, and a dependant who had obligations to the household but who made no presumptions.




ululations.

bilharzia.





mollified



sluice

baraza.

Kiongozi

