Against Nature

violently hostile, a few that were fervently enthusiastic, but none that were completely indifferent. 

His family hardly concerned themselves about him; sometimes his father would come to visit him at his school: ‘Hello … be good and work hard … goodbye.

they let him pursue whatever studies pleased him and neglect all the others, not wanting to alienate this independent spirit through the interference of the school’s lay assistants.


Like cutting a cross-section anywhere through the stem of a fern, a fleur de lis seemed to be the only thing imprinted on the soft pulp of their aged 

An unspeakable feeling of pity descended on the young man for these mummies entombed in their Pompadour-style catafalques, all rococo

and wainscotting, for these gloomy sluggards who were living with their eyes constantly fixed on some nebulous Canaan, on some imaginary Palestine.


They were hedonists, enamoured of operettas and horse-racing, playing baccarat and lansquenet, gambling their fortunes on horses, on cards, and on all those pleasures dear to hollow men.

Nervy, ill at ease and indignant at the insignificance of ideas exchanged and received, he became like those people Nicole talked about, who ‘hurt all over’; he reached the point where he was constantly flaying himself, enduring the jingoistic nonsense and society gossip every morning in the newspapers, and exaggerating in his mind the extent of the success that an all-powerful public always and especially reserves for works written with neither style nor ideas.


By candlelight, blue tends toward an artificial green; if it is dark, like cobalt or indigo, it turns black; if it is light, it turns grey; if it is a soft true blue, like turquoise, it grows dull and cold. So, unless it was combined with some other colour by way of an additive, there could be no question of making blue the dominant note of a room.
 On the other hand, iron greys look gloomier and heavier still; pearl greys lose their azure and metamorphose into a dirty white; browns become lifeless and cold; as for dark greens such as emperor green and myrtle green, they have the same properties as deep blue and merge into black; so that left the paler greens such as peacock green, cinnabar green

and lacquer green, but there again the artificial light banishes their blues and preserves only their yellows, which in turn give off a false tone, a hint of cloudiness.


He brought this couple to Fontenay, accustomed as they were to the job of sick-nurse, to the regularity of distributing, hour by hour, spoonfuls of medicine and herbal infusions, to the rigid silence of cloistered monks who had no communication with the outside world and lived in rooms with barred doors and windows.



 He imagined himself to be between decks, on a brig, and, fascinated, he would study the marvellous mechanical fish, wound up like pieces of clockwork, which passed in front of the porthole or clung to the artificial seaweed; or better still, inhaling the odour of tar which was sprayed into the room before he entered, he would examine the coloured engravings hanging on the walls, representing, as in the offices of steamship agencies and at Lloyd’s, steamers bound for Valparaiso and Río de la Plata, and the framed notices on which were listed the itineraries of the Royal Mail Steam Packet line and the Lopez and Valéry Companies, together with the freight charges and ports of call of the Atlantic mail boats.
 Then, when he was tired of consulting these guides, he could rest his eyes by looking at the chronometers and compasses, the sextants and dividers, the binoculars and maps scattered over a table on which rested a single book, bound in sealskin, The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym, specially printed for him on laid paper of pure linen with a seagull watermark, each sheet of which was selected by hand.
 Finally, he could take in his fishing rods, some nets browned with tannic acid, a few rolls of russet sailcloth, and a tiny anchor made out of cork, painted black, all thrown in a heap, near the door that communicated with the kitchen via a passage lined with wadding, which absorbed, like the corridor that connected the dining room to his study, every odour and every sound.
 In this way he could quickly, almost instantaneously, procure, without moving a muscle, the sensations of a long sea voyage, and since, in truth, the pleasure of travelling only exists in retrospect and almost never in the present, at the very moment it’s being experienced, he could savour
Note: vr


 It’s all down to knowing how to do it, knowing how to concentrate your mind on a single point, knowing how to abstract yourself sufficiently to bring about the hallucination and therefore substitute the dream of reality for reality itself.


whose figure and whose form is more dazzling, more splendid than that of those two locomotives adopted by the Northern railway line?
 ‘One, the Crampton, is an adorable blonde with a shrill voice, her long delicate body imprisoned in a glittering corset of copper, as supple and sinewy as a stretching cat, a showy, gilded blonde whose extraordinary grace is frightening, when, stiffening her muscles of steel, beginning to sweat on her warm flanks, she sets in shuddering motion the immense rosette of her slender wheels and springs forward, eagerly, across hill and dale!
 ‘The other, the Engerth, is a dark and monumental brunette with a deep husky cry, her brawny loins constrained by a cast-iron girdle, a monstrous beast with a dishevelled mane of black smoke, and six low, coupled wheels, what a crushing force she has when, making the earth tremble, she slowly, ponderously, pulls the heavy tail of her goods-wagons!
 ‘Certainly there’s nothing to match such delicate slenderness and terrifying force in the dainty beauty of the blonde and the majestic beauty of the brunette; one can surely say that man, in his own way, has done as well as the God in which he believes.’


dominated in the distance by other batteries and other fortifications whose high embankments seemed, by the light of the moon, to be painted in silvery gouache against a darkening sky.


During the final few months of his stay in Paris, weary of everything, worn down by hypochondria and crushed by melancholy, he had arrived at such a state of nervous sensibility that the sight of an unpleasant object or person etched itself so deeply on his brain it took several days even to begin to efface the impression, and the touch of a human body brushing against him in the street had been one of the most excruciating tortures.
 He positively suffered at the sight of certain physiognomies, seeing the kindly or ill-tempered expressions of some faces almost as an insult, feeling an urge to slap this gentleman who walked along, eyes closed, with such a learned air, or that one who swayed from side to side smiling at his reflection in the windows; not to mention the one who seemed to be engaging in a whole world of thought, all the while devouring, with furrowed brow, rambling editorials and scraps of gossip in his newspaper.
 He detected a stupidity so inveterate, such a detestation for the ideas so dear to him, such a scorn for literature, for art, for everything that he adored, so deep-rooted and anchored in the narrow minds of these merchants, exclusively preoccupied with swindling and money-making and accessible only to that base distraction of mediocre minds, politics, that he returned home in a rage and locked himself up with his 

The author he really loved, and who caused him to leave aside forever his reading of Lucan’s resounding addresses, was Petronius.
 This latter was a shrewd observer, a discerning analyst, a marvellous painter; calmly, without prejudice, without hate, he described the daily life of Rome, recounted in the short, lively chapters of the Satyricon the manners and morals of his age.


Christian era, skipped over the orator Fronto, with his antiquated expressions badly put together and badly recalled; stepped over the Attic Nights of Aulus Gellius, his friend and disciple, a shrewd, prying mind, but a writer bogged down in a glutinous style; and halted in front of Apuleius, of whose work he owned a first edition folio printed in Rome in 1469.
 This African delighted him; the Latin language reached its high-water mark in his Metamorphoses; it stirred up the silt, the various waters rushing in from every province, and mixed and mingled everything into a bizarre, exotic, almost new tone; new mannerisms and characteristics of Latin society found themselves moulded into neologisms created for the conversational needs of a small corner of Roman Africa; what’s more, the joviality of an evidently corpulent man, his southern exuberance,

Unfortunately, under artificial light its cool flames no longer sparkle; its blue water retreats into itself, seems to fall asleep and only wakes with a glimmer at the break of day.
Note: Safir

He closed the window; this sudden shift with no transition from torrid heat to the frosts of mid-winter dazed him; he curled up close to the fire and the idea came to him to drink a liqueur to warm himself up.
 He went into the dining room where, built into one of the bulkheads, there was a cupboard containing a series of little barrels, ranged side by side on tiny sandalwood stands, their bellies pierced lower down by silver taps.

He hurried out of his house and, recalling the name of a mechanic who called himself a dentist of the people and who lived down near the quays, he rushed through the streets biting his handkerchief and holding back his tears.


perhaps he had remembered those rites of ancient Egypt, those sepulchral embalming ceremonies, when alchemists and priests would lay out the corpse of a dead queen on a bench of jasper, pull her brain out through the nasal cavities with curved needles and her intestines


 He had had the drawing room wallpapered in bright red, and on all the partitions in the room hung prints in ebony frames by Jan Luyken, an old Dutch engraver who was almost unknown in France.
 Of this fantastic and lugubrious, forceful and wild artist, he possessed a series of his Religious Persecutions, appalling engravings containing all the tortures that the madness of religion could devise, engravings which screamed out with the spectacle of human suffering, of bodies roasting on burning coals, of craniums scalped with sabres, trepanned with nails and hacked with saws, of intestines unfurled from stomachs and wound onto spools, of fingernails slowly torn out with pincers, of eyeballs gouged and eyelids sewn open with needles, of arms dislocated or meticulously broken, of bones stripped of flesh, slowly scraped with steel 

Alone among these young men, des Esseintes encouraged his friend’s resolution as soon as he heard that his fiancée wished to live on the corner of one of the new boulevards, in one of those modern apartments shaped like a rotunda.


: Do unto others what you wouldn’t want them to do unto you. Follow that maxim and you’ll go far. 

He was now incapable of understanding a word of the volumes he consulted; his very eyes would read no more – it seemed to him that his mind, saturated with literature and art, refused to absorb any more.
 He was living off himself, feeding on his own being like a hibernating animal that nestles in its hole all winter: solitude had acted on his brain like an opiate. After first making him tense and on edge, it then brought on a torpor haunted by confused daydreams; it destroyed his plans, broke his will and ushered in a procession of dreams to which he submitted, passively, without even trying to escape them.
 The chaotic mass of readings and meditations on art that he had accumulated since his isolation, like a dam constructed in order to stop the flow of old memories, had been suddenly swept away and a flood-tide unleashed, submerging the present and the future, drowning
Note: Corona

 everything beneath the waters of the past, filling his mind with an immense expanse of sadness on which floated, like ridiculous bits of wreckage, the uneventful episodes and absurd trifles of his existence.
 The book he was holding in his hand fell to his knees; his mind gave way and he watched, full of fear and loathing, the years of his dead life file past; they swirled and streamed around the recollection of Madame Laure and Auguste, embedded in the fluctuating waves, like a stake driven firmly into the ground, like a clear-cut fact. What a period that had been! It was a time of society soirées, of horse-racing and card games, of love affairs ordered in advance and served up punctually, at the stroke of midnight, in his pink boudoir. He remembered faces, expressions, pointless remarks which haunted him with the tenacity of a vulgar tune you can’t help but hum, but which finally fades away all of a sudden without you being aware of it.


once he’d left college, his scepticism had grown; his encounters with the intolerant and narrow-minded world of the Legitimists, his conversations with unintelligent church wardens and uncouth priests, whose blunders had torn aside the veil so cleverly woven by the Jesuits, had further strengthened his spirit of independence and increased his distrust in any faith whatsoever.
 He considered himself, in short, free from every tie, every constraint; he had simply preserved, contrary to those men educated in the lycées or lay boarding schools, an excellent memory of his college and his masters, and, now that he thought about it, ended up asking himself if the seeds that had hitherto fallen on barren ground weren’t at last beginning to sprout.
 Indeed, for several days past, he had been in an indescribable state of mind. For a brief instant he would believe, would turn instinctively towards religion, then at the slightest approach of reason his attraction to the faith evaporated; but he remained, in spite of everything, deeply troubled.

; he knew, beyond a doubt, that the moment Lacordaire speaks of, that moment of grace ‘when the final ray of light penetrates the soul and draws to a common centre the truths that lie scattered within,’ would never come to him;

These afflictions had slowly disappeared, thanks to a calmer, more regulated life; now, they were imposing themselves again, in a different form, wandering over his whole body; the pains left his skull and headed for his hard, swollen stomach, and for his intestines, pierced as if by a hot poker in urgent but futile strainings; then a dry, racking, nervous cough, beginning just as he awoke and always lasting the same number of minutes, choked him in his bed; finally he lost his appetite, the dry fires of heartburn, hot and gaseous, ran around his stomach, he was bloated, stifled, and after each attempt at a meal could no longer endure buttoned trousers or a tight waistcoat.
 He gave up alcohol, coffee and tea, lived on a milk diet, had recourse to ablutions of cold water, stuffed himself with asafoetida, valerian and 

They took down from another cart a new batch of monsters: Echinopsis, its vile pink flowers emerging like amputated stumps from cotton-wool compresses; Nidularium, its sabre blades opening to reveal its flayed and gaping fundament; Tillandsia lindeni, trailing jagged scrapers the colour of wine must; Cypripedium, with its complicated, incoherent contours, as if thought up by a mad inventor. In form they looked like a sabot or a little bag, on top of which curled a human tongue, its tendons taut, like those you see sketched in the pages of works dealing with diseases of the throat and mouth; two little wings of a red jujube colour, which appeared to have been borrowed from a child’s windmill, completed this baroque assemblage of the underside of a tongue the colour of slate and wine lees, and a glossy pouch the lining of which oozed a viscous glue.


Once he was alone, he stared at this tide of plants which surged across his hall; they were all mixed up, crossing their swords, their daggers and their lances with one another, forming an outline of a pile of green weapons above which floated flowers of a harsh, dazzling colour, like barbarian pennants.


Then his blood froze and he was rooted to the spot in horror. That ambiguous, sexless face was green, and violet eyelids opened to reveal terrible eyes of a cold and limpid blue; its mouth was ringed with sores; incredibly thin arms, the arms of a skeleton bare to the elbows, issued from ragged sleeves, trembling with fever, and fleshless thighs shivered in long boots that were too large.
 Its ghastly gaze was fixed on des Esseintes, penetrating him, freezing him to the very marrow; even more panicked than he was, the bulldog-woman clung to him and howled blue murder, her head thrown back on her taut 

pierrots

There it was, behind the round skylight in the corridor; more dead than alive, des Esseintes turned round and through the round window saw its pricked-up ears, its yellow teeth and its nostrils breathing out two jets of steam that smelt of carbolic acid.


During the course of this singular malady, which ravages families whose bloodline is at an end, periods of crisis gave way to sudden bouts of calm; without being able to explain why des Esseintes woke up one fine morning fit and healthy; no racking cough, no more wedges being driven into the back of his neck with hammer blows, but rather an ineffable sensation of well-being, a lightness of mind in which thoughts clarified and, from being opaque and turbid, became fluid and iridescent, like delicately tinted soap bubbles.


He had for many years been skilled in the science of perfume; he believed that the sense of smell could experience pleasures equal to those of hearing and sight, each sense being capable, by dint of a natural disposition or expert cultivation, of perceiving new impressions, of intensifying them, of coordinating them and composing them into that whole which constitutes a work of art; and that, in short, it was no more abnormal that an art such as the ability to analyse odours should exist than any other, such as that of picking out sound waves or of catching diversely coloured rays of light on the retina of the eye; only just as no one without an intuitive ability expressly developed by study could distinguish a painting by an old master from a daub, or a melody by Beethoven from one by Clapisson, no more could anyone, without prior instruction, at first help confusing a bouquet created by a real artist with a potpourri fabricated by some industrial manufacturer to be sold in grocery shops and cheap bazaars.
 In this art of perfume one branch had more than all others captivated him, that of exact 
Note: Parftm copy

In fact, perfumes are almost never produced from the flowers whose names they bear; the artist who dared to borrow only natural elements would produce nothing but a bastard work with neither authenticity nor style, seeing as the essence obtained by the distillation of flowers offers only a very distant and very imprecise analogy to the actual aroma of the living flower, as it disperses its effusions in the open air.
 Consequently, with the exception of the inimitable jasmine, which admits of no fakes or counterfeits, which even spurns any approximation, all flowers can be exactly represented by a combination of alcohols and spirits, stealing the very personality of its model and adding that certain something, that added nuance, that heady bouquet, that unique touch which qualifies it as a work of art.
 To sum up, in perfumery the artist completes the aroma initially furnished by nature, shaping and setting the scent in the same way a jeweller brings out the ‘water’ of a precious stone and thereby gives it value.
Note: Parfym forts

To do this he had first of all to master its grammar, to understand the syntax of odours, to absorb the rules that regulate them and, once he was familiar with this dialect, to compare the works of the masters, Atkinson, Lubin, Chardin, Violet, Legrand and Piesse, to analyse the construction of their sentences, to weigh the proportion of their words and the arrangement of their periods.


Its history followed, step by step, that of our language. The Louis XIII style of perfumery, composed of elements dear to the period – iris powder, musk, civet and myrtle water, already known under the name ‘Angel Water’ – was just about sufficient to express the somewhat rakish charms, the slightly crude tones of the time, which certain sonnets of Saint-Amant have conserved for us. Later, with myrrh and frankincense, potent and austere mystical fragrances, it was almost possible to represent the pompous manner of le Grand Siècle and the superfluous artifices of its oratorical art, the expansive, buttressed and balanced style of Bossuet and the masters of the pulpit; later still, the blasé, knowing graces of French society under Louis XV more easily found their interpretation in frangipani and maréchale hair powder, which in a way summed up that epoch; then, after the boredom and apathy of the First Empire, which used eau-de-Cologne and rosemary water to excess, perfumery hurled itself, in the wake of Victor Hugo and Gautier, towards the lands of the East; it created its own Les Orientales, little bouquets bursting with spices, discovered new tonalities and as yet unattempted antitheses, sifting and selecting antique nuances which it elaborated,

refined and combined; and in the end, it resolutely rejected the self-willed decrepitude to which it had been reduced by Malherbe, Boileau, Andrieux and Baour-Lormian, those vile distillers of their own poems.
 But this new language hadn’t remained stationery since the period of the 1830s. It had continued to evolve and, modelling itself on the progress of the nineteenth century, had advanced in parallel with the other arts: it, too, had submitted to the desires of amateurs and artists, taking up Chinese and Japanese art forms, devising sweet-smelling sketchbooks, imitating bouquets of Tateoka flowers, eliciting the odour of Rondeletia from a blend of lavender and clove; the peculiar aroma of Chinese ink from the marriage of patchouli and camphor; the aroma of the Japanese raisintree by compounds of citron, clove and neroli.
 Des Esseintes studied and analysed the essence of these

Like Balzac who was obsessed by a pressing need to blacken a number of sheets of paper in order to get himself in the mood,

pieces by Baudelaire, such as L’Irréparable and Le Balcon, where the last of the five lines that comprise the verse is an echo of the first,

Here, a famille verte porcelain pot contained Schnouda, that marvellous white cream which, when applied to the cheeks, turns to a tender pink under the influence of the air and then to a rosiness so lifelike that it produces the truly realistic illusion of blushing skin; there, lacquer boxes inlaid with mother-of-pearl encased in Japanese gold and Athenian green gold the colour of a blister-beetle’s wing, golds and greens that transform themselves into a deep purple when you wet them; next to pots filled with filbert paste, harem serkis, emulsions of Kashmir-lily, lotions of strawberry and elderflower for the complexion, and alongside tiny bottles filled with China ink and solutions of rosewater for the eyes, instruments made of ivory, mother-of-pearl, steel, and silver were strewn about – tweezers, scissors, skin scrapers, powderpuffs, hair crimpers, shaving brushes, back scratchers, beauty spots and nail files, as well as alfalfa toothbrushes for the gums.


Yes, the season of the great rains is come; behold the spewing of gutter-pipes singing under the pavements and the horse manure marinating in puddles, 



 judge by the few portraits preserved at the Château de Lourps, the family of the Floressas des Esseintes had, in days of old, been composed of muscle-bound troopers and grim-faced mercenaries. Squeezed tightly into old frames that barely contained their broad shoulders, they alarmed visitors with their staring eyes, their yataghan moustaches, and their chests, the huge bulges of which were crammed into the enormous shells of their cuirasses.



 ‘It’s true,’ des Esseintes continued, returning to the starting point of his argument, ‘it’s true that for the most part nature is, by herself, incapable of begetting such perverse and unhealthy species; she furnishes the raw material, the seed and the earth, the nurturing womb and the elements of the plant, which man then raises, moulds, paints and sculpts according to his fancy.
 ‘Stubborn, chaotic and limited though she is, nature has at last been subdued and her master has successfully managed to alter the minerals of the earth through chemical reactions, to utilise carefully matured combinations and slowly prepared cross-fertilizations, to make use of skilful cuttings and methodical graftings, so now he makes her sprout different coloured flowers on the same stem, invents new tones for her, modifies at will the age-old form of her plants, he finishes off her rough outlines, completes her sketches, marks them with his stamp, imprints them with his own artistic hallmark.
 ‘It goes without saying,’ he added, summing up his thoughts, ‘that in a few years man can bring about a choice that indolent nature would take centuries to produce; certainly as things stand at the moment horticulturists are the only true artists.’
 He was a little tired and felt stifled by the atmosphere of all these confined plants; the shopping trips he had made over the last few days had exhausted him; the transition from fresh air to the warmth of his room, from the stillness of a reclusive life to the bustle of an unfettered existence had been too sudden; he left the vestibule and stretched out on his bed; but, absorbed by a single subject, as if wound up by a spring, 

And yet here I am warming myself in front of a large fire, while a basket of blooming flowers on the table gives off an aroma of benzoin, geranium and vetiver grass that fills the room. In the middle of November, at Pantin, in the Rue de Paris, Spring persists and here, in my solitude, I laugh at those faint-hearted families who, to avoid the approach of the cold weather, escape on the first steamer heading towards Antibes or Cannes.
 ‘It has to be said that inclement nature has nothing to do with this extraordinary phenomenon: it’s to man’s industry alone that this artificial season at Pantin is indebted.
 ‘In fact these flowers are made of taffeta mounted on binding wire, and the smell of Springtime that seeps through the window joints is given off by the neighbouring factories, the perfumeries of Pinaud and Saint James.
 ‘For craftsmen worn out by hard labour in the workshop, for lowly clerks – all too often also fathers – this illusion of a small breath of 

An indistinct smell of tincture of Tolu, balsam of Peru and saffron, held together by a few drops of amber and musk, 

The billows of ink had evaporated and dissipated, the rough edges of the clouds had melted away, and the sky was uniformly flat as if covered with a brackish film. Little by little, this film seemed to descend and a watery haze enveloped the countryside; the rain no longer poured down in cataracts as it had the day before, but fell without respite, thin, sharp and penetrating, saturating paths and swamping roads, joining heaven and earth with its innumerable threads; the light grew murky; a livid daylight illuminated the village, now transformed into a lake of mud stippled by needles of rain that pricked the filthy water of the puddles with drops of quicksilver; amid the desolation of nature all colour had faded, leaving only the roofs to glisten above the dull tones of the walls.


He was alone in his compartment; a blurred, dirty countryside, seen as if through an aquarium filled with murky water, receded at full speed behind the convoy of rain-lashed railway carriages. Immersed in his thoughts, des Esseintes closed his eyes.


The rain came in diagonally through the cab windows; des Esseintes had to pull up the panes which were streaked with channels of running water, while gobbets of mud sprayed up like fireworks on every side. To the monotonous sound of sacks of peas being shaken over his head as the heavy showers pattered against the trunks on the roof of the cab, des Esseintes daydreamed about his voyage; this dreadful weather was like a first instalment of England, paid in advance in Paris, a rain-soaked London, colossal, immense, stinking of iron foundries and soot, smoking

Certainly, Haarlem and Amsterdam had captivated him; the unwashed masses, seen in their proper rustic surroundings, really resembled those painted by van 

He’d acted in a similar way in sourcing his papers: tired of silver-glazed Chine, nacreous and gilt Japon, white Whatman, unbleached Hollande, buff-coloured Turkey and Seychall Mill, and disgusted, too, by mechanically produced papers, he decided one fine day to order special handmade laid papers from the old factories at Vire, where they still used the pestles formerly employed to grind 

Thus he had had the works of Baudelaire printed with the marvellous episcopal typeface used by the old firm of Le Clerc,

studying the human creature who is apt to become embittered and skilled in self-deception, who compels his thoughts to cheat each other in order to suffer more keenly, spoiling in advance, thanks to his power of analysis and observation, all possible future joys.


drugs are invoked to help numb the suffering and to check boredom. 

Le Dîner d’un athée.


 La Tentation de saint Antoine and Salammbô

Villiers appropriated its fastidious and terrifying premise.
 It was the same with ‘L’Intersigne’, which was later added to the Contes cruels, a collection of indisputable talent which also included ‘Véra

Swift. A series of fables, Les Demoiselles de Bienfilâtre, L’Affichage céleste, La Machine à gloire, and Le Plus beau dîner du monde, revealed a sarcastic spirit that was singularly inventive and bitter. All the filth of contemporary utilitarian ideas, all the money-grabbing ignominy of the age was glorified in these stories whose poignant irony enraptured des Esseintes.

Cold water frozen into your frame by ennui,
 How many times, and for hours on end, grieved
 By dreams and searching my memories
 Like leaves beneath your glass’s icy depths
 Have I seen myself in you like a distant shadow!
 But oh the horror of those nights when in your cruel waters
 I saw my scattered dreams in all their 

But above all he’d felt ineffable pleasure when listening to plainsong, which the organist had kept up despite new fashions in music.
 That form, now considered to be an old-fashioned Gothic form of Christian liturgy, an archeological curiosity, a relic of ancient times, was the true voice of the early Church, the soul of the Middle Ages; it was the eternal prayer, sung and modulated according to the transports of the soul, an everlasting hymn offered up over the centuries to the Most High.


For years now he’d obstinately refused to take part in these pious extravagances, falling back on his childhood memories, regretting even having heard some of the Te Deums of the great masters, because he could remember that admirable Te Deum sung in plainsong, that hymn so simple and so awe-inspiring, composed by some saint or other, a Saint Ambrose or a Saint Hilary, who, lacking the complicated resources of an orchestra and lacking the musical techniques of modern 

Schubert’s Lieder that had lifted him up, taken him out of himself and then left him prostrated, as if after a discharge of nervous fluid, after a mystical debauch of the soul.


however intuitive they might be, doctors knew nothing about neurosis, were ignorant even of its very causes. Like all the others, this one would prescribe the invariable zinc oxide and quinine, potassium bromide and valerian. ‘But

The less scrupulous, less dull-witted among them threw aside all sense of shame; they dabbled in shady deals, sifted through the muddy waters of business, were brought before the court of assizes like common swindlers, where they served to elevate the tone of human justice which, not always able to stop itself from being biased, ended up appointing them as prison librarians.


In the Dominican section of his library didn’t he have a book by a doctor of theology, the Reverend Father Rouard de Card, a preaching friar who had categorically proved, in a pamphlet entitled On the Adulteration of Sacramental Substances, that the majority of masses were invalid, by reason of the fact that the ingredients used in religious services had been debased by their manufacturers?
 Over the years, holy oils had been adulterated with chicken fat; candle wax with calcinated bones; incense with cheap resin and old benzoin. But what was worse was that the substances indispensable to the holy sacrifice, the two substances without which no oblation is possible, had also been debased: the wine, by numerous dilutions and by illicit additions of Pernambuco, elderberry, alcohol, alum, salicylic acid and lead oxide; the bread – the bread of the 

that ought to be kneaded with the finest wheat flour – by white haricot bean flour, potash and pipe clay!
 But now they had gone even further; they had dared to eliminate wheat entirely and shameless wholesalers were making almost all their hosts out of potato starch.
 Now God refused to manifest Himself in potato starch. It was an undeniable and certain fact; in the second volume of his treatise on moral theology, his Eminence Cardinal Gousset had dwelt at length on this question of fraud practised from the divine point of view, and, according to the incontestable authority of this expert, one could not consecrate bread made out of oat, buckwheat or barley flour, and if things were a little more doubtful in the case of rye-bread, there could be no argument, no debate, when it came to potato starch which, according to the ecclesiastical expression, ‘was not, under any circumstances, a matter fit for sacramental purposes’.
 Because potato starch was so easy to work with and the unleavened wafers made with it looked so attractive, this outrageous deception had become so widespread that 

Lord, take pity on the Christian who doubts, on the sceptic who wants to believe, on the galley slave of life who sets sail alone in the night, under a sky no longer lit by the consoling beacons of the ancient hope!’


This ideal was, of its type, realized in a masterpiece which, far more than L’Assommoir, has been the paragon of Naturalism, Gustave Flaubert’s L’Éducation Sentimentale. This book was for all of us associated with the Soirées de Médan a veritable bible; but it brought little grist to our mill. It was complete, something not to be attempted again even by Flaubert himself; consequently we found ourselves reduced in those days to meandering, to prowling around and about down paths that had been more or less thoroughly explored.


The strange thing was that, without being aware of it at the beginning, I was led by the very nature of my work to study the Church under a number of aspects. It was, in fact, impossible to go back to the only really characteristic era humanity has ever known, to the Middle Ages, without realizing that the Church embraced everything, that art existed only in her and through her. Not having faith, I looked upon the Church with some suspicion, surprised at her greatness and her glory, asking myself how a religion which seemed to me only made for children had been able to suggest such marvellous works.
 I prowled around her a little in a groping way, guessing more than I saw, reconstructing a whole for myself with the fragments I recovered in museums and old books. And today, after longer and more trustworthy investigations, when I browse through the pages of Against Nature that deal with Catholicism and religious art, I notice that the miniature panorama I sketched on leaves of a notepad is 

I never dreamt that from Schopenhauer, whom I admired beyond reason, to Ecclesiastes and the Book of Job was but a step. The premises of Pessimism are identical; only when it comes to action does the philosopher slip away. I liked his ideas on the horror of life, on the stupidity of the world, on the harshness of fate; I like them just as well in the holy books; but Schopenhauer’s observations end in nothing; he leaves you, so to speak, in the lurch; his aphorisms, in fact, are nothing but a herbarium of desiccated lamentations; the Church, for her part, explains origins and causes, points out conclusions, offers remedies; she is not satisfied with giving you a spiritual consultation, she treats you and cures you, while the German quack, after clearly showing you that the complaint you suffer from is incurable, turns his back on you with a 

From a distance, these similarities and dissimilarities stand out clearly, but at that period if I saw them at all I paid no heed; the need to come to a conclusion didn’t appeal to me; the road laid down by Schopenhauer was passable and offered varied views, I walked along contentedly, without desiring to know where it ended up. In those days I had no real perspicuity as to debts to be paid, no apprehension of how things would end; the mysteries of the catechism seemed to me to be childish; like all Catholics, indeed, I was entirely ignorant of my religion; I failed to realise that everything is a mystery, that we live only in mystery, that if chance existed it would be still more mysterious than Providence. I couldn’t admit that suffering could be inflicted by a God, I imagined that Pessimism could be the consoler of elevated souls. What stupidity! There was no empirical evidence, no ‘human document’, to use a phrase dear to Naturalism, to support it. Never has Pessimism consoled either the sick of body or the afflicted of soul.
 I smile, now, after so many years, when I re-read the pages in which these theories, so resolutely false, are 

But what strikes me most in this reading is this: all the novels I’ve written since Against Nature are contained in embryo in that book. Its successive chapters are in effect simply the foundations of the books that followed.
 The chapter on the Latin literature of the Decadent period I have, if not developed, at any rate probed deeper into, when treating the liturgy in En route and L’Oblat. I could reprint it today without changing anything, except for Saint Ambrosius, whose watery prose and turgid rhetoric I still dislike; he still seems to me what I called him then, a ‘boring Christian Cicero’. But, by contrast, as a poet he is charming, and his hymns and those of his school that figure in the Breviary are among the finest the Church has preserved; I will add that the admittedly rather specialised literature of the hymnal might well have found a place in the reserved compartment of this chapter.
 At the present moment I’m no more enamoured of the classical Latin of Virgil and ‘Chick-pea’ Cicero than I was in 1884; as in the days of Against Nature I prefer the language of the Vulgate to that of the Augustan age, or even to that of the Decadent period, though it is more interesting with its gamey flavour and its marbled tints like over-high 

Without believing, as did an old writer of the sixteenth century, Estienne de Clave, that precious stones propagate themselves like human beings, with a seed disseminated in the womb of the earth,

They have been seen in this way from remotest antiquity and the tropology of gems is one branch of that Christian symbolism which has been so completely forgotten about by priests and laymen in our own day, and which I have tried to reconstruct in its broad outlines in my book on the basilica of Chartres.


 have since written the counterpart to this botanical study in La Cathédrale, in reference to that liturgical horticulture which has given rise to such curious pages in the works of St. Hildegard, St. Melito and St. Eucherius.


He might also have experimented with the aromas of the Church, incense, myrrh and that strange Thymiama mentioned in the Bible and which is still cited in books of ritual as being required to be burned, together with incense, under the mouths of church bells when they are baptised, after the bishop has washed them with holy water and made the sign of the cross on them with the Holy Chrism and the unction of the sick; but this fragrance seems forgotten even by the Church, and I think that a priest would be highly astonished if you asked him for Thymiama.
 Yet the recipe is given in Exodus. Thymiama was compounded of styrax, galbanum, incense and onycha, and this last substance would seem to be nothing other than the operculum of a certain shellfish belonging to the ‘purple’ variety, which are dredged up in the Indian deltas.
 Now it is difficult, not to say impossible, given the insufficient description of this shellfish and its place of origin, to prepare an authentic Thymiama; and that is a pity, because if it had been otherwise this lost 

 for the chapters on contemporary secular and religious literature, they still, in my opinion, like that on Latin literature, remain true. The chapter devoted to secular writing has helped to bring to attention several poets little known to the public of the day: Corbière, Mallarmé, Verlaine. I have nothing to retract from what I wrote nineteen years ago; I have retained my admiration for these authors, and that which I professed for Verlaine has even increased. Arthur Rimbaud and Jules Laforgue would have deserved to figure in des Esseintes’ florilegium, but they hadn’t yet published anything at that period and it wasn’t until long after that their works appeared.

d’Aurevilly in extolling the work of this man who was so imperfect, but so interesting, and Against Nature has, I think, helped in the small success that his best book, L’Homme, has won since his death.


Finally, if ever a chapter could be considered the starting-point for other books, it is surely that on plainsong, which I afterwards developed in all my books, in En route and especially in L’Oblat.


God was digging to lay his cables, and he only worked in the darkness of the soul, in the night. Nothing was visible; it wasn’t until years afterwards that the spark began to run along the wires. Then I could feel my soul being moved by these shocks; 

After such a book, it only remains for the author to choose between the muzzle of a pistol and the foot of the cross.’
 The choice is made.
 
 J.-K. Huysmans


From black-bordered plates they had eaten turtle soup, Russian rye bread, ripe olives from Turkey, caviar, salted mullet roes, smoked black pudding from Frankfurt, game birds covered in sauces the colour of liquorice and boot polish, truffle gravy, chocolate-flavoured cream, plum-puddings, brugnon musqué peaches, fruit preserves in grape juice, mulberries and black-heart cherries; from dark glasses they had drunk wines from Limagne and Roussillon, from Tenedos, Valdepeñas and Oporto; and after coffee and walnut brandy, they had savoured kvass, porter and 

