Immense World : How Animal Senses Reveal the Hidden Realms Around Us (9780593133248)

Our Umwelt is still limited; it just doesn’t feel that way. To us, it feels all-encompassing. It is all that we know, and so we easily mistake it for all there is to know. This is an illusion, and one that every animal shares.
			 We cannot sense the faint electric fields that sharks and platypuses can. We are not privy to the magnetic fields that robins and sea turtles detect. We can’t trace the invisible trail of a swimming fish the way a seal can. We can’t feel the air currents created by a buzzing fly the way a wandering spider does. Our ears cannot hear the ultrasonic calls of rodents and hummingbirds or the infrasonic calls of elephants and whales. Our eyes cannot see the infrared radiation that rattlesnakes detect or the ultraviolet light that the birds and the bees can sense.
			 Even when animals share the same senses with us, their Umwelten can be very different. There are animals that can hear sounds in what seems to us like perfect silence, see colors in what looks to us like total darkness, and sense vibrations in what feels to us like complete stillness. There

Light is just electromagnetic radiation. Sound is just waves of pressure. Smells are just small molecules. It’s not obvious that we should be able to detect any of those things, let alone convert them into electrical signals or derive from those signals the spectacle of a sunrise, or the sound of a voice, or the scent of baking bread. The senses transform the coursing chaos of the world into perceptions and experiences—things we can react to and act upon. They allow biology to tame physics. They turn stimuli into information.

The platypus’s bill is loaded with sensors that detect electric fields and sensors that are sensitive to pressure; does the platypus’s brain treat these streams of information differently, or does it wield a single sense of electrotouch?

Note: Kanner jattemkt

. I’m reminded of Hamlet’s plea to Horatio that “there are more things in heaven and Earth…than are dreamt of in your philosophy.” The quote is often taken as an appeal to embrace the supernatural. I see it rather as a call to better understand the natural. Senses that seem paranormal to us only appear this way because we are so limited and so painfully unaware of our 

As the writer Marcel Proust once said, “The only true voyage…would be not to visit strange lands but to possess other eyes…to see the hundred universes that each of them sees.”

Food and foes aside, few sources of odor are as pertinent to an elephant as other elephants. They’ll regularly inspect each other with their trunks, probing away at glands, genitals, and mouths. When African elephants reunite after a prolonged separation, they go through intense greeting rituals. Human observers can see their flapping ears and hear their throaty rumbles, but for the elephants themselves, the experience must also be olfactory pandemonium. They vigorously urinate and defecate, while aromatic liquid pours forth from glands behind their eyes, filling the air around them with scents.
			 Few people have done more to study elephant odors than Bets Rasmussen,[*20] a biochemist who was once crowned “the queen of elephant secretions, excretions and exhalations.” If an elephant produced it, Rasmussen likely sniffed it and possibly tasted

When they walk their favorite routes and encounter the smelly deposits of other elephants, what are they getting besides identity? Do they know the emotional states of those previous passers-by? Can they sense stress or diagnose illnesses? What of their wider environment? Elephants that have returned to postwar Angola seem to skirt around the millions of landmines that still dot the land—unsurprising, perhaps, given how quickly they can be trained to detect TNT. They’ve been known to dig wells in times of 

There’s hardly a place you can touch a catfish without brushing thousands of taste buds. If you lick one of them, you’ll both simultaneously taste each other.[*32] “If I were a catfish, I’d love to jump into a vat of chocolate,” John Caprio tells me. “You could taste it with your butt.”

Through their actions, cells can detect and react to the substances around them. This process is temporary: After the GPCRs are done, they either release or destroy the molecules that they’ve grabbed. But one group of them bucks this trend: opsins. They are special because they keep hold of their target molecules, and because those molecules absorb light. This is the entire basis of vision. This is how all animals see—using light-sensitive proteins that are actually modified chemical sensors.
			 In a way, we see by smelling light.

Humans are such a visual species that those of us with sight instinctively equate active eyes with an active intellect. In their flitting, darting movements, we see another curious mind investigating the world. In the case of jumping spiders, this is not unwarranted anthropomorphism. Despite their poppy-seed-sized brains, they really are surprisingly smart.[*1] The Portia species are famed for planning out strategic routes when stalking prey, or flexibly switching between sophisticated hunting tactics. The

And unlike other spiders that mostly sense the world through vibrations and touch, jumping spiders rely on vision. That’s why the eight eyes occupy up to half the volume of their large heads. They are the spiders whose Umwelten are closest to ours. In that similarity, I find affinity. I watch the spider, and it watches me back, two starkly different species connected by our dominant sense.

Look at a full, living scallop, and you’ll see a very different animal. And that animal will see you, too. Each half of a scallop’s fan-shaped shell has eyes arrayed along its inner edge—dozens in some species, and up to 200 in others. In the bay scallop, the eyes look like neon blueberries. Speiser finds them “funny and horrifying and charming,” all at once.
			 It is strange enough that scallops have eyes when most other bivalves like mussels and oysters do not. It’s even stranger that those eyes, as Mike Land showed in the 1960s, are complex. Each one sits at the end of a mobile tentacle. Each has a little pupil: “It’s wild and creepy to see all of them opening and closing at the same time,” Speiser says. Light passes through the pupil and hits the back of the scallop’s eye, where it is reflected by a curved mirror. The mirror is a precisely tiled array of square crystals that collectively focus light onto the scallop’s retinas. That’s retinas, plural. There are two per eye, and they are about as different as two animal retinas could be.[*12] Between them, they have thousands of photoreceptors, which gives them enough spatial resolution to detect small objects. “Their optics are really good,” Speiser says.[

Why do they need such a complicated eye, let alone dozens or hundreds of them? What does a scallop use its vision for? To find out, Speiser ran an experiment that he called Scallop TV. He strapped their shells to small seats, placed them in front of a monitor, and showed them computer-generated movies of small, drifting particles. It was such a ridiculous setup that no one seriously thought that it would work. But it did: If the particles were large enough and moving slowly enough, the scallops opened their shells, as if ready to feed. “It was the craziest thing I’ve ever seen,” Johnsen tells me.
			 At the time, Speiser thought that scallops must use their eyes to spot potential food. Now he thinks something else is happening. Interspersed between their eyes are tentacles that scallops use to smell molecules in the water. Speiser thinks they use smell to recognize predators like starfish and vision to detect things that are simply worth an investigative sniff. When they opened their shells in response to Scallop

My guess is that we were seeing scallops being curious,

But if that’s the case, why does each individual eye have such good resolution? Why do sophisticated components like the mirrors and double retinas exist? Why are there so many eyes when just a few could cover the entire space around the scallop’s shell? Why have such good eyes evolved in an animal whose brain can barely handle the information they convey?[*15] No one knows. “Sometimes I feel like I can almost get my mind around it, and extend my empathy into scallops,” Speiser tells me. “But a lot of the time I feel lost again.”[*16]
			 Some animals might have the scallop’s distributed vision without possessing eyes at all. The brittle star Ophiomastix wendtii looks like a skinny, spiny starfish, or perhaps like five centipedes wriggling out of a hockey puck. It doesn’t have any obvious eyes, but it clearly 

In 2012, Martin and his colleagues measured the griffon vulture’s visual field—the space around its head that its eyes can cover. They got each bird to rest its beak on a specially fitted holder, and then looked into its eyes from all directions with a visual perimeter. “It’s the same device that an optician would use when you get an eye test,” Martin told me at the time. “It’s just a question of sitting the bird down for half an hour. One tried to grab at me and I did lose a bit of my thumb.”
			 The perimeter revealed that a vulture’s visual field covers the space on either side of its head but has large blind spots above and below.

Their ultrafast hunts are guided by ultrafast vision. It may seem strange to talk about animals seeing at different speeds, because light is the fastest thing in the universe, and vision seems instantaneous to us. But eyes don’t work at light speed. It takes time for photoreceptors to react to incoming photons, and for the electrical signals they generate to travel to the brain. In killer flies, evolution has pushed these steps to their limits. When Gonzalez-Bellido shows these insects an image, it takes just 6 to 9 milliseconds for their photoreceptors to send electrical signals, for those signals to reach their brains, and for their brains to send commands to their muscles.[*22] By contrast, it takes between 30 and 60 milliseconds for human photoreceptors to accomplish just the first of those 

The eyes of a scallop are positively glacial (1 to 5 Hz), and those of nocturnal toads are slower still (0.25 to 0.5 Hz). Those of leatherback turtles (15 Hz) and harp seals (23 Hz) are faster but still sluggish. Those of swordfish aren’t much better under normal conditions (5 Hz), but these fish can heat up their eyes and brains with a special muscle, boosting the speed of their vision by eight times. Many birds have naturally fast vision; with a maximum CFF of 146 Hz, the pied flycatcher—a small songbird—has the fastest vision of any vertebrate that’s been tested, perhaps because its survival depends on tracking and catching flying insects.[*24] And those insects have eyes that are faster still. Honeybees, dragonflies, and flies have CFFs between 200 and 350 Hz.
			 It’s possible that each of these visual speeds comes with a different sense of time’s passage. Through a leatherback turtle’s eyes, the world might seem to move in time-lapse, with humans bustling about at a fly’s frenetic pace. Through a fly’s eyes, the world might seem to move in slow motion. The imperceptibly fast movements of other flies would slow to a perceptible crawl, while slow animals might not seem like they were moving at 

The blue is now almost laser-like—eerily pure and all-encompassing. Through it, silvery fish dart about. Gelatinous jellyfish and siphonophores slowly snake past. At 300 meters, it’s as dark as a moonlit night, and getting darker. Gradually, the fish get blacker, the invertebrates redder. Increasingly, they produce their own light, and their bioluminescent flashes paint the outline of your descending submersible. At 850 meters, the residual sunlight is so faint that your eyes can no longer function. At 1,000 meters, no animal eyes can. This is the beginning of the bathypelagic or midnight zone. The complex visual scenes of the surface are long gone and have been replaced by a living star-field of bioluminescence, twinkling in the otherwise total darkness. Depending on where you are in the world, there might be another 10,000 meters of ocean left to go.
			 The deep ocean

The way to think about ocean exploration is that we probably create a sphere a hundred yards wide that keeps away anything that can get away,” says Sonke Johnsen. “Most of the time, we’re seeing terror and blindness. We see how animals behave when

So when a group of these monkeys cavorts through the treetops in search of food, some will see red fruits against green leaves, while others will only see yellows and grays. Even brothers and sisters can perceive different colors.
			 It’s easy to assume that the dichromats must be at a disadvantage. But after 15 years of studying white-faced capuchins in the forests of Costa Rica, Amanda Melin thinks differently. By following several groups of these monkeys, she learned to identify every individual on sight. And by collecting their poop and sequencing their DNA, she worked out which were trichromats and which were dichromats. Neither group, she found, is more likely to survive or reproduce than the other. The trichromats are indeed better at finding brightly colored fruit, but the dichromats surpass them at finding insects disguised as leaves and sticks. Without a riot of colors to confuse or distract them, they’re better at detecting borders and shapes, and seeing through camouflage. Melin has watched them nabbing insects that she, a trichromat, didn’t even know were there. Seeing extra colors has both drawbacks and benefits. More isn’t necessarily better, which is why some females are still dichromats and all males 

	 To me, Sam’s silence speaks volumes. He reminds us that seeing more colors isn’t advantageous in and of itself. Colors are not inherently magical. They become magical when and if animals derive meaning from them. Some are special to us because, having inherited the ability to see them from our trichromatic ancestors, we imbued them with social significance. Conversely, there are colors that don’t matter to us at all. There are colors we cannot even 
Note: Framtiden gen od for rika som gillar tavlor

Our lenses typically block out UV, but people who have lost their lenses to surgeries or accidents can perceive UV as whitish blue. This happened to the painter Claude Monet, who lost his left lens at the age of 82. He began seeing the UV light that reflects off water lilies, and started painting them as whitish blue instead of white. Monet aside, most people can’t see UV, which probably explains why scientists were so eager to believe that the ability was rare. In fact, the opposite is true. Most animals that can see color can see UV. It’s the norm, and we are the weirdos.[*

direction perpendicular to the line of travel, but they’re sometimes confined to just one plane—imagine attaching a rope to a wall and then shaking it up and down, or side to side. This kind of light is said to be polarized, and it is common in nature. It is formed when light is scattered by water or air, or when it reflects off smooth surfaces like glass, waxy leaves, or bodies of water. Humans are largely oblivious to polarization, but most insects, crustaceans, and cephalopods can see it in much the same way that they see color. Their eyes typically have two classes of photoreceptors that are stimulated by horizontally or vertically polarized light. By comparing their two receptors, they can distinguish between light that’s polarized to different extents, or at different angles. You could call these animals dipolats.[

Guided by evolution, eyes are living paintbrushes. Flowers, frogs, fish, feathers, and fruit all show that sight affects what is seen, and that much of what we find beautiful in nature has been shaped by the vision of our fellow animals. Beauty is not only in the eye of the beholder. It arises because of that eye.


	 In a warm room that smells sweetly of corn, I’m holding a small rodent in my gloved hand. Pink and mostly hairless, it seems less like a rat or guinea pig and more like a finger that’s been soaking in a bath too long. It almost looks embryonic, even though it is a fully grown adult. Its eyes are black pinpricks. Its long incisors stick out in front of its lips. Its loose skin feels tough but is so translucent that I can make out its internal organs, including the dark outline of its liver. It is a naked mole-rat. Its appearance is the least strange thing about it.[

To be clear, the separation between nociception and pain does not make the latter any less real. People (and especially women) with chronically painful disorders have long been disbelieved and neglected by the medical establishment. They’ve been wrongly told that their suffering is just in their heads, or the result of mental health problems like anxiety. Pain is easy to dismiss in this way because it is subjective. And thanks to the unfortunate persistence of dualism—the outdated belief that the mind and body are separate—people often equate subjective with woolly, and psychological with imagined. This is harmfully wrong. It’s not the case that nociception is a physical process of the body, while pain is a psychological process of the mind. Both arise from the firing of neurons. It

That distinction “is a relic of attempts to emphasize differences between humans and other animals or between ‘higher’ and ‘lower’ animals,” wrote Donald Broom, a biologist who specializes in animal welfare. After all, in other senses, the actions of sensory receptors and the subjective experiences produced by the brain don’t get different names. Scientists who study eyes don’t get into arguments about whether humans have vision and fish merely have photoreception.

Elwood studied the common hermit crab, which frequents European beaches and tucks its soft abdomen into empty seashells. These shells are valuable property, and the crabs are vulnerable without them. But Elwood and his colleague Mirjam Appel found that they will nonetheless evacuate if given a small electric shock. These flights looked reflexive, but the crabs didn’t always flee. It took a stronger shock to force them out of their favored periwinkle shells than it did to evict them from the less desirable flat-top shells. And they were half as likely to abandon their shells if they could smell the scent of predators in the water. “That told me that this isn’t a reflex,” Elwood says. Instead, evacuation is a decision the crabs make after weighing up several sources of information.
			 The crabs also behaved differently long after the shocks. After fleeing, they wouldn’t return to their shells, despite being dangerously exposed. They groomed the part of their abdomens that got shocked. And even when

Crustaceans are the evolutionary cousins of insects and have similarly simple nervous systems. And yet, Elwood’s crabs behaved in apparently complex ways. How do we reconcile that inconsistency? If an animal’s actions don’t match what its brain is theoretically capable of, are we overinterpreting its behavior or underestimating its nervous system? Sneddon and Elwood argue that it’s the latter. Adamo would say it’s the former. And it really isn’t clear who is right, or if they all 

The evolutionary benefit of nociception is abundantly clear. It’s an alarm system that allows animals to detect things that might harm or kill them, and take steps to protect themselves. But the origin of pain, on top of that, is less obvious. What is the adaptive value of suffering? Why should nociception suck? Some scientists suggest that unpleasant emotions might have intensified and calcified the effect of nociceptive sensations, so that animals not only avoid what is currently hurting them but also learn to avoid it in the future. Nociception says, “Get away.” Pain says, “…and don’t go back.” But Adamo and others argue that animals can learn to avoid dangers perfectly well without needing subjective experiences. After all, look at what robots can do.
			 Engineers have designed robots that can behave as if they’re in pain, learn from negative experiences, or avoid artificial 

In September 2010, the European Union extended its regulations on animal research to cephalopods—the group that includes octopuses, squid, and cuttlefish. Being invertebrates, cephalopods aren’t usually covered by laws that protect the welfare of backboned lab animals like mice or monkeys. But they also have much larger nervous systems than most invertebrates—500 million neurons in an octopus, compared to 100,000 in a fruit fly.

But surprisingly, they never touched, groomed, or cradled their wounds, the way humans, rats, and even hermit crabs do. They could easily reach their stump with any of their other seven arms, but they didn’t try.
			 Even more surprisingly, Crook found that injured squid behave as if their entire bodies were sore. When humans and other mammals get cut or bruised, the damaged area is painful but the rest of the body isn’t. If I singe my hand, it hurts when I prod the burn but not when I poke my foot. But when Crook damaged one of the squid’s fins, the nociceptors on the opposite fin were just as excitable as those on the wounded side. Imagine if your entire body became delicate to the touch whenever you stubbed your toe: That’s a squid’s reality. “When they’re injured, their whole body becomes hypersensitive,” Crook tells me. “They go from being normal to this potential world of pain.” This might explain why they don’t groom their wounds. They can sense that they’ve been hurt, but they might not be able to tell where.

For mammals, the localized nature of pain allows us to protect and clean vulnerable body parts, while getting on with the rest of our lives. Why should squid lack such a useful source of information? One possibility, Crook says, “is that everything in the ocean will eat a squid.” Injured squid are especially attractive to predatory fish, either because they are more conspicuous or because they look (or smell) like easier prey. By setting their entire bodies on high alert, they might be better at evading attacks that could come from any direction.

The many debates about pain in animals often revolve around a simple question: Do they feel it? And lurking behind that question are several implicit ones. Is it okay to boil a lobster? Should I stop eating octopus? Can I go fishing?[*10] When we ask if animals can feel pain, we’re asking less about the animals themselves, and more about what we can do to them. That attitude limits our understanding of what animals actually sense.
			 There is much more to pain than its presence or absence. Shelley Adamo is right that we need to understand more about its benefits and costs. Pain does not exist for its own sake. There’s no reason why anything should hurt. Things hurt so that animals can do something with that information. And without understanding their needs and their limitations, it’s hard to interpret their behavior correctly.
			 Insects, for example, often do alarming things that seem like they should be excruciating. Rather than limping, they’ll carry on putting pressure on a crushed limb. Male praying mantises will continue mating with females that are devouring them. Caterpillars will continue munching on a leaf while parasitic wasp larvae eat them from the inside out. Cockroaches will cannibalize their own guts if given a chance. These behaviors “strongly suggest that if a pain sense is present, it is not having any adaptive influence on the behavior,” wrote Craig Eisemann and colleagues in 

Instead of focusing on whether pain even exists, we might ask, as physiologist Catherine Williams told me, “In which conditions and from which stimuli is it an advantage to have it, experience it, and display it?” And we would find that pain manifests differently in a burrowing mole-rat than in a scorpion-hunting mouse, or in a long-armed octopus than in a short-armed squid. We might possibly find different forms of pain in sociable animals that can call for help or solitary ones that must fend for themselves, or in short-lived animals that have few chances to repeat their mistakes versus long-lived ones that have many chances to. And we would certainly learn that pain can vary in animals that must tolerate extremes of temperature, from baking heat to freezing 

hibernaculum

All living things are deeply affected by temperature. If conditions are too cold, chemical reactions slow to a useless crawl. If they are too hot, proteins and other molecules of life lose their shape and fall apart. These effects constrain most of life to a Goldilocks zone where the temperature is just right. The limits of that zone vary, but they always exist, which is why every animal with a nervous system has a way of sensing and responding to temperature.
			 Animals use a variety of temperature sensors, and the most thoroughly studied of these are a group of proteins called TRP channels. They are found throughout the body on the surface of sensory neurons, where they act as tiny gates that open when they reach the right temperature. When this happens, ions enter the neurons, electrical signals travel to the brain, and we feel the sensations of hot or cold. Some TRP channels are tuned to hot temperatures, and others to cold ones. (Cold isn’t just the absence of hot; it’s a different sense in its own right.)[*2] TRP channels also respond to different severities of temperature: Some detect mild and innocuous ranges, while others fire at dangerous and painful extremes. Certain chemicals can trigger these channels as well, producing heating and cooling sensations. Chili 

burn because the capsaicin within them triggers TRPV1—a TRP channel that detects painfully high temperatures.[*3] Mint cools because it contains menthol, which activates the cold sensor called 

Such maneuvers are possible because the chitin that makes up a fly’s antennae is very good at conducting heat and because the antennae themselves are tiny. They can so quickly equilibrate with their surroundings that a fly can instantly tell if it has blundered into air that’s too hot or cold. Gallio found that it can even use its antennae as stereo thermometers to track gradients of heat, much as a dog uses its paired nostrils for odors. The fly can tell if one antenna is just 0.1°C hotter than the other, and uses those comparisons to steer toward the more comfortable temperature. When Gallio tells me about these results, I suddenly reconsider the movements of every fly I’ve ever seen. Their paths, which always seemed so random and chaotic, now take on an air of purpose, as if the insect is threading its way through an obstacle course of hot and cold that I can’t perceive, don’t care about, and oafishly wade 

	 The fly’s ability is called thermotaxis, and it’s common in the animal kingdom.[*5] Creatures big and small use their thermosensors to tell if their surroundings have become intolerable, and to gauge how the temperature around them changes as they move. Like children who are told if they’re getting warmer or colder as they approach a hidden object, most animals use changes in ambient temperature to follow the gradients of heat that are created by sunbeams and shadows, breezes and currents. But some have transformed this common ability into something rarer. They can tell if point B is hotter than point A without having to move there. They can actively seek out sources of heat from a distance.

The beetles’ spherical sensors must be extraordinarily sensitive, since the insects frequently travel to burning forests and other hot places from dozens of miles away. The Coalinga oil depot that was struck by lightning in 1925 lies in the middle of an arid, treeless region, and most of the beetles that arrived there likely came from forests that lay 80 miles to the east. Based on this distance, and simulations of the 1925 blaze, Schmitz calculated that the beetles’ pits are more sensitive than most commercial infrared detectors and on a par with state-of-the-art quantum detectors that must first be cooled with liquid nitrogen. Schmitz thinks that the pits couldn’t possibly be this sensitive on their own. The beetles must have ways of making them more responsive.
			 During flight, their beating wings create vibrations that travel into the nearby pits, shake the spherical sensors, and push the sensory neurons within to the edge of firing. It now takes much less infrared radiation to fully push them over that edge. Think of this another way: Imagine a brick that’s lying flat on its side. If a fly crashed into it, it wouldn’t budge. But if it was instead balanced on its edge, even a fly would be enough to topple it. In that state, the brick would be primed to react to a tiny amount of energy. Schmitz argues that a fire-chaser beetle’s beating wings prime its heat sensors in a similar way, setting them up to detect sources of infrared that would normally be too weak. A beetle that’s sitting on a tree would be relatively insensitive. But as soon as it takes off in search of fires, its body automatically widens its search area and transforms even faint traces of distant heat into blazing 

When zoologist Ronald Kröger got a dog—a golden retriever named Kevin—he started wondering about its nose. Sleeping dogs tend to have warm noses. But shortly after they wake up, the tips become wet and cool. Kröger found that in a warm room, a dog will keep its nose around 5°C cooler than the ambient temperature, and between 9° and 17°C 

Almost every photograph of sea otters shows them floating on their backs, often asleep, sometimes holding hands. This creates the deeply misleading impression that they are lazy and sedate. In fact, “they’re really fidgety,” Strobel tells me. “They’re constantly doing things, playing with things, wanting to touch things.” This rambunctious quality is something that sea otters share with other mustelids—the mammal group that includes weasels, ferrets, badgers, honey badgers, and wolverines. But sea otters combine what Strobel calls a “general mustelid mojo” with large size—at 3 to 5 feet in length, they’re the biggest of the group—and unusually dexterous paws. Consequently, they’re infamously hard to house in captivity.[*1] “They’re just super-destructive,” says Strobel. “They’re very curious, and the way they manifest that curiosity is: How can I break this and figure out what’s inside?”


Ruffini endings respond to tension and stretch in the skin: They help you adjust your grip, and recognize when objects slip from your grasp. Meissner corpuscles respond to slow vibrations: They produce the feelings of slip and flutter as your fingers move over surfaces, and they allow Braille readers to make sense of raised dots. Pacinian corpuscles respond to faster vibrations: They’re useful in assessing finer textures or in sensing objects through tools, like hairs that are gripped by tweezers or soil that crunches beneath a spade. Most of these receptors also exist in a sea otter’s paw or a platypus’s snout. Collectively, they produce the sensation of touch, just as our sweet, sour, bitter, salt, and umami receptors together define our sense of taste.
			 At a broad level, we understand how these mechanoreceptors work. Despite their variety, they all consist of a nerve ending enclosed in some kind of touch-sensitive capsule. A tactile stimulus bends or deforms the capsule, causing the nerve inside to fire. But exactly how this happens is still unclear, because touch is one of our least-studied senses. Compared to sight, hearing, or even smell, it inspires less art and fewer scientific devotees. Until very recently, the molecules that allow us to experience touch—the equivalent of opsins for vision, or odorant receptors for smell—remained completely mysterious. We only have a rough sense of the sense that senses roughness.
			 But touch cannot be ignored. It is a sense of intimacy and immediacy—and it varies just as much as smell or vision. Animals differ widely in how sensitive their touch organs are, what they use those organs to feel, and even the body parts on which those organs are found. And by considering how touch contributes to the Umwelten of different creatures, we will see sandy beaches, underground tunnels, and even internal organs in new 

