Approaching the Hunger Games Trilogy

[j]ustice doesn’t exist and freedom is an illusion” and the trilogy ends with her being “used up psychologically and emotionally, thoroughly disillusioned” (Cusey

The Hunger Games is a reality television program. An Extreme one, but that’s what it is.”
  

   
     —Suzanne Collins, “Q & A with Hunger Games Author Suzanne Collins” (Hudson)


One night, I was lying in bed, and I was channel surfing between reality TV programs and actual war coverage. On one channel, there’s a group of young people competing for I don’t even know; and on the next, there’s a group of young people fighting in an actual war. I was really tired, and the lines between these stories started to blur in a very unsettling way. That’s the moment when Katniss’s story came to me [Margolis 2008].


concern with the ways in which popular programming 

desensitizes people to violence and conflict. She finds reality television particularly “disturbing” since it often involves “people being humiliated, or brought to tears, or suffering physically” (Hudson). The problem with this, she indicates, is that when audiences “see real tragedy playing out on, say, the news, it doesn’t have the impact it should.

she uses Katniss Everdeen’s first-hand account of her experiences to suggest that, in addition to providing entertainment, reality programs act as “socializing agents,” to borrow April Roth’s terms, playing an essential role in maintaining “the dominant ideology” (35). Though largely unscripted, such programs are constructed, edited, and in some cases digitally altered so as to provide compelling narratives that both affirm prevailing beliefs and naturalize them by embedding them in contexts that represent themselves as real. As Christopher Wright observes, it is the latter that makes these programs such effective ideological agents: reality shows are fictions that present themselves as fact 

Whereas Survivor’s primary ideological function is to affirm capitalism, celebrating the profit motive, the Hunger Games’ function is to affirm the Capitol’s absolute dominance over the districts through its control of resources. As its very name suggests, the Hunger Games center on scarcity, every resource in the arena being carefully managed by the Gamemakers, who represent the Capitol itself. Rather than simply set up certain rules and parameters and let the Games play themselves out, the Gamemakers manage everything from food and water to temperature on an ongoing basis, demonstrating that their power is absolute.

The Gamemakers’ absolute control over resources in the arena is presumably meant to mirror the Capitol’s control over the resources of Panem,

Capitol is able to convey the idea that a widespread rebellion could not possibly be sustained, and that uprisings would result in further suffering rather than social change.

reality television in the United States is largely determined by market forces, the ideological content of the Hunger Games is determined by a centralized government, and therefore the Games serve as a form of state propaganda.

having the mayors of each district read an official history of Panem, which includes an account of an earlier rebellion against the Capitol and explains that the Games exist as a reminder of the Capitol’s power. As Katniss observes, “Whatever words they use, the real message is clear: ‘Look how we take your children and sacrifice them and there’s nothing you can do. If you lift a finger, we will destroy every last one of you’” (Hunger Games 16). The

The ways in which Collins represents fashion-themed reality programming in the Hunger Games trilogy is also worth considering in detail since Collins addresses the fashion industry in all three novels, ultimately suggesting that it has a powerful influence on the way people think and act. Indeed, the pre-game programming that documents Katniss’s transformation into a sexual object can itself be regarded as commentary on the ideological implications of programs such as Extreme Makeover, Project Runway, and America’s Top Model. By exploring the objectification process through the consciousness of Katniss as she is prepared for the Games by Cinna and his 

Gradually Katniss comes to accept her transformation and even appreciate the fact that being an object of desire affords certain benefits, commenting, “The Hunger Games aren’t supposed to be a beauty contest, but the best-looking tributes always seem to pull more sponsors” (58). She manages to retain her sense of self despite her objectification, however, at least until she sees her own reflection just before her interview with Caesar Flickerman: “The creature standing before me in the full-length mirror has come from another world. Where skin shimmers and eyes flash and apparently they make their clothes from jewels. Because my dress, oh, my dress is entirely covered in reflective precious gems ... I am not pretty. I am not beautiful. I am as radiant as the sun” (Hunger Games 119–20).

. Upon leaving the stage, however, Katniss quickly regains her perspective, apparently realizing that in allowing herself to be objectified she has compromised herself and her values. By the time she returns to the Training Center, her giddiness has become anger, and she assaults Peeta for publicly declaring his desire for her in his interview: in her view, by making her an “object of love,” he has made her seem foolish and weak (Hunger Games 136). Even though Haymitch eventually convinces Katniss that presenting herself as a “heartbreaker” gives her the best chance of winning sponsors, going forward she no longer gets caught up in such performances, realizing that it is a just a means to an end and not part of who she really is (Hunger Games 

The challenges involved in maintaining the double-consciousness necessary to succeed in the Games become most evident in Katniss’s relationship with Peeta, a relationship that begins as a “showmance,” that is, as a romantic relationship that develops within a reality program

showmance is initially strategic: although Peeta has real feelings for Katniss, he declares his love for her in an interview that is broadcast just before the Games begin in the hopes that it will increase sponsor interest, leading to more gifts while in the arena. Katniss, who has no advance knowledge of the scheme, agrees to play along with it once Haymitch convinces her that perceptions are more important than reality in the Games since, in the end, they are just “a big show” (Hunger Games 133). Once they are in the arena, there is initially little opportunity for the two of them to develop their showmance further: indeed, Peeta seems to betray Katniss by allying himself with the Careers and helping them to hunt her down. Even then, though, Katniss tries to maintain the appearance of a romance, giving the cameras a “knowing smile” as if Peeta’s apparent betrayal is part of their plan (164). It is only after the rules of the Games are officially changed to allow for two victors that the showmance becomes central again as Katniss plays up the romance in order to obtain gifts from their sponsors. As her relationship with Peeta develops, however, Katniss has increasing difficulty in separating her performance from her real feelings. After nearly dying in an effort to get medicine desperately needed by Peeta, she begins to realize how attached she has become to him, how her need to be with him is no longer “about the sponsors” but about “

Eventually Katniss’s recognition that her showmance with Peeta has emerged as the Games’ primary narrative allows her to manipulate not only sponsors but the Gamemakers themselves (Vizzini 103). When, towards the end of the Games it is announced that the earlier rule change has been revoked and that there can only be one survivor—that either Katniss or Peeta will have to die—Katniss is able to convince the Gamemakers that she and Peeta would both rather die than survive alone. As Katniss realizes, a double suicide would subvert the ideological purpose of the Games, which is to dramatize the government’s absolute power over its citizens: in killing themselves, Katniss and Peeta would be demonstrating agency, albeit in a very limited way, something that is entirely unacceptable to the Capitol. Moreover, a double suicide would deny the Capitol a victor to parade through the districts as a living reminder of their power over life and death. Consequently, the Gamemakers capitulate and both Katniss and Peeta are declared winners, Katniss in effect defeating the Capitol at its own game.


 Games seem to have an additional function in the Capitol itself, where the decadent population has come to expect the government to provide them with entertainment, just as the citizens of ancient Rome did, according to Juvenal (89). Indeed, Collins indicates herself in an interview with her publisher that she had ancient Rome in mind:

   
     In keeping with the classical roots, I send my tributes into an updated version of the Roman gladiator games, which entails a ruthless government forcing people to fight to the death as popular entertainment. The world of Panem, particularly the Capitol, is loaded with Roman references. Panem itself comes from the expression “Panem et Circenses” which translates into “Bread and Circuses.”


citizens are so caught up in the artificial drama that plays out on television that they pay little attention to the fact that their “president” is, in fact, a dictator who attained power by murdering his rivals or that their affluence comes at the cost of great privation elsewhere.

   The Hunger Games do more than just distract its viewers in the Capitol, however; they also affirm the existing political structure by validating the idea that those on top are there because they have proven themselves most worthy, and the idea that ruthlessness is not only acceptable as a means of acquiring power but even necessary. These ideas seem to pertain not only to the government in relation to the people but, more broadly, to Capitol 

the Games reinforce the idea that those living in the Capitol are deserving of the privileges they enjoy, privileges denied to those living in the districts, and that their government’s ruthlessness in maintaining these privileges is justified.

Artificial drama, it seems, has become more important than real-life suffering, and so suffering continues, unacknowledged and unchecked by the very people who benefit from it. More than that, though, Collins suggests that programs such as Cops, Survivor, Extreme Makeover, and The Biggest Loser have a powerful ideological effect, affirming Americans’ sense that they are worthy of the privileges they enjoy and that almost any sort of action can be justified in maintaining them. Like the Hunger Games, these programs accomplish this by dehumanizing people: they stage conflicts, elicit negative behaviors, and then construct narratives around those behaviors that present them as authentic, ultimately suggesting that people get what they deserve.


incisive satire of reality television shows,” targeting tropes such the makeover and the showmance. The Hunger Games trilogy does more than just parody shows such as Survivor, Extreme Makeover, and Project Runway, however: it also offers indirect commentary on the ways in which such programming influences people’s beliefs and behaviors through its representation of the Hunger Games as an ideological agent. More than that, though, the trilogy serves as a form of media criticism, one of Collins’s primary concerns being how to make her readers, particularly children, more conscious of the way media informs their thinking. In particular, she hopes to help them differentiate between “what is real and what is not real” by exposing reality television’s political and ideological functions in her work (Hudson). By presenting a detailed account of the ways in which reality programming affects the ways in which her protagonist thinks and acts, Collins demonstrates how accepting what one sees on television at face value makes one vulnerable to manipulation and control. Ultimately Collins suggests that only way to protect oneself is by approaching things critically, by recognizing that even unscripted, reality-based programming are constructions, and that as such, they reflect the beliefs and values of their producers.


. We learn about the world in which Katniss lives only as she does, sharing her consciousness, as it were, as she sees every district of Panem for the first time through a train window.


