Breaking the Maya Code

In the present edition, the orthography used in writing Mayan words follows that established by the Guatemalan Institute of Mayan Languages, with the exception of names of archaeological sites (these have been

too long in the professional and tourist literature to be changed without confusing the reader). In this, the vowels and most of the consonants are generally pronounced as they are in Spanish, with the exceptions that follow. The consonant w is like English w. As it had in sixteenth-century Spain, x has the sound of English sh. Mayan languages make an important distinction between glottalized and non-glottalized consonants; the former are pronounced fortis, with constricted throat; in this

orthography, such consonants are followed by an apostrophe. The glottal stop (’) is also a consonant, and is similar to the way a Cockney Englishman might pronounce the tt in little.
 In Classic Mayan (the language of the inscriptions), there are two voiceless aspirates. One is h, very similar to English h, the other is j, a guttural consonant like the ch in German Bach.


It was 12 cycles, 18 k’atuns, 16 tuns, 0 winals, and 16 k’ins since the beginning of the Great Cycle. The day was 12 Kib 14 Wo, and was ruled by the seventh Lord of the Night. The moon was nine days old. Precisely 5,101 of our years and 235 days had passed since the creation of this universe, and only 23 years and 22 days yet remained until the final 
Note: Bra bombnedslag i kulturen

To those far-off Maya, writing was of divine origin: it was the gift of Itzamnaaj, the great creator divinity whom the people of Yucatán on the eve of the Conquest considered to be the first priest. Each year in the month Wo – the same month in which we found ourselves on the Neva embankment – the priests invoked him by bringing out their precious books and spreading them out on fresh boughs in the house of the local lord. Sacred pom incense was burned to the god,

Athanasius Kircher
Note: Borrglomd konstig prast

. How many vacationing tourists who visit the glorious ruins of Yucatán are aware that Mexican law forbids the teaching in schools of the Yucatec Maya tongue – the tongue of the people who built these pyramids?

How many heads of state in those countries have any “Indian” blood to speak of? And when has any Native American language been heard in the halls of the United Nations? The answer is “none” and “never.” No imperial conquest has ever been so total, or a great people so shattered.


We now know that Ch’olan is to the inscribed texts of the Classic Maya cities what Coptic was to the hieroglyphic inscriptions of ancient Egypt.



is just not possible in Mayan to use an imperfective verb (referring to actions or events in the past, present, or future that have not been completed) without sticking a date or a temporal aspect adverb in front of it. The Maya are, and have always been, very, very particular about 

t u hatz’-ah-o’on-o’ob, “they hit us” (in the past)
 t, completive aspect, transitive verb
 u-…-o’ob, “they” (Set A)
 hatz’, “to hit”
 -ah, perfective suffix
 o’on, “us” (Set B)

 And another:
 
 taan in-hatz’-ik-ech, “I am hitting you”
 taan, durative aspect
 in-, “I” (Set A)
 hatz’, “to hit”
 -ik, imperfective verb suffix
 -ech, “you” (object, Set B pronoun)


A traveler heading south on foot from the Petén would eventually encounter the incredibly rough karst terrain of the Verapaz country, with huge caverns – one of which, near the town of Chamá, was believed to be the entrance to Xibalbá, the Maya Underworld.



Mayanists, in their enthusiasm for their subject, are apt to forget that the culture they are studying was part of a more widespread pattern or way of life that is called “Mesoamerican.” Broadly defined, Mesoamerica comprises that part of Mexico and adjacent Central America which was civilized at the time of the Spanish Conquest. It includes most of central, southern, and southeastern Mexico (and en-compasses the Yucatán Peninsula), Guatemala, Belize, and the westernmost portions of Honduras and El Salvador. Within its borders, many tongues were and are spoken, including of course languages of the Mayan family, and just about every kind of environment can be found: deserts, snow-capped volcanoes, temperate valleys, tropical lowlands, mangrove swamps, etc.
 Yet within this babble of tongues and varied landscape, certain cultural traits are held in common. All of these people were farmers, cultivating corn, beans, squashes, and chili peppers; all lived in villages, towns, and cities, and traded in large and complex markets; all had books (although only the

Zapotec of Oaxaca, the Maya, and the poorly known Isthmian or “epi-Olmec” people of Veracruz had true writing). Perhaps most importantly, all had a polytheistic religion which, while not uniform everywhere, had significant elements in common, such as a sacred calendar based on a cycle of 260 days, and the belief that it was absolutely necessary to shed human blood – either one’s own or that of captives – in honor of the gods and ancestors.
 At one end of the Mesoamerican time-span stand the Aztec and their mighty empire, best known of all since their civilization was destroyed – and recorded – by the Spanish conquistadors. The language of their empire (which impinged upon, but never included the Maya) was Nahuatl, an agglutinating tongue blessedly free of the complexities which make the Mayan languages so difficult; this was the lingua franca of most of non-Maya Mesoamerica, used by traders and bureaucrats alike.


sacrificial rites involving the four directions of the universe.

Classic Maya civilization flourished for about six centuries, in Old World terms roughly from the reign of the Roman emperor Diocletian, that formidable producer of Christian martyrs, to King Alfred of Wessex, defeater of Danes. The Prophet Mohammed was contemporary with the transition from the Maya Early to Late Classic; when he fled from Mecca to Medina, marking the start of the Islamic Era, the great Maya ruler of Palenque, Pakal or “Shield,” had been on the throne for eight years.


The K’iche’ was the most powerful of these states, until smashed by that most horrible of all the conquistadors, the brutal Pedro de Alvarado. Perhaps the lasting glory of the K’iche’ is that they managed to preserve well into the colonial era (when it was written down using Spanish letters) the supreme Maya epic, known as the Popol Vuh or “Book of Counsel” – by any reckoning the greatest achievement of known native New World literature.34 As we shall see, this has proved to be the key to some of the deepest and most esoteric secrets of Classic Maya culture.


they learned nothing and they forgot nothing.

It would take a small encyclopedia, or perhaps a five-hour celluloid Hollywood epic, to do ample justice to the life and career of “Count” Jean Frédéric Maximilien Waldeck, the self-styled “first Americanist.”6 Even the feats of the beloved Baron Munchausen sometimes pale by comparison with Waldeck’s. In his cutting Boston manner, the historian William H. Prescott once confided to Mme. Fanny

He was also an accomplished pornographer, producing the illustrations for Pietro Aretino’s licentious sixteenth-century verses, I Modi (“The Love Positions”).


so indebted to his creditors that his landlord 

The two had met four years before in London, and become friends; thus, it was no surprise that when Catherwood settled in New York to practice architecture, Stephens persuaded him to accompany him to Central America. Out of this collaboration came the landmark 1841 publication, in two volumes, Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas, and Yucatán; and, following a second trip to explore Yucatán, the Incidents of Travel in Yucatán of 1843.27 Every Mayanist, myself included, keeps these often reprinted masterpieces on his bookshelf in a place of honor, since they mark the very genesis of serious Maya research. I never get tired of rereading my own copies – there is always something fresh to find in Stephens’ delightful, unpretentious prose, and inspiration in Catherwood’s crisp 

Setting aside their exploration of the Guatemalan highlands (where there are no Classic period inscriptions at all), they surveyed, described, and drew the major buildings and monuments of Copán, Quiriguá, and Palenque in the southern lowlands, and Uxmal, Kabah, Sayil, and Chichén Itzá in the north – along with several sites in the Puuk area that have since received little or no archaeological attention. Stephens and Catherwood were the first since the days of the Spanish Conquest to visit the clifftop ruins of Tulum on the east coast of the Peninsula. Needless to say, all this was done under the most trying conditions, long before the age of bug repellents, antibiotics, and anti-malarial pills; our travelers clearly suffered, but never complained, and Stephens’ prose retains its equanimity throughout (unlike that of Waldeck and other more choleric explorers).




H. Rider Haggard’s great adventure story Heart of the World;36


 Making a record of this sort may have been harrowing, but getting the results of his great research safely back to London, casts and all, must have been equally daunting. At any rate, they did get there, and Maudslay employed an artist, Miss Annie Hunter, to draw, from the casts and photographs with which he furnished her, accurate lithographic plates of every monument and inscription. For Maudslay had found his publisher in the persons of his friends the biologists Frederick Du Cane Godman and Osbert Salvin. Beginning in 1889, when the first fascicle came out, Maudslay’s monumental Archaeology was to appear as an appendix to the multivolume work Biologia Centrali-Americana; the whole of his Archaeology reached its final form as one volume of text and four of 

Goodman, born in 1838, was a journalist, and he had begun his career early. Before he was twenty-three, he had become owner and editor of the Territorial Enterprise of Virginia City, in what was then Nevada Territory. This had been the site of the fabulous gold strike of 1859 known as the Comstock Lode, and Virginia City was a Wild West town par excellence: it had a hundred saloons in 1870, in a population of thirty thousand! Among students of American literature, Goodman has a certain claim to fame as the person who gave a young man named Samuel Clemens his first writing job in 1861, as a reporter on the Enterprise; in fact, Clemens first signed his name as “Mark Twain” on a humorous contribution to Goodman’s paper. Goodman became rich on his Comstock Lode investments, and moved to California, where he founded the San Franciscan (Twain was a contributor to the first number). He then bought a large raisin orchard in Fresno, California, and in the 1880s began his Maya studies.


Head variants for the Maya numbers, with equivalents in spoken Yucatec.


In his autobiography dictated in 1906, Mark Twain had these characteristically lighthearted words to say about Goodman, his onetime employer:


By the 1890s, Americans had begun to chew gum in earnest, and chicle – the basic ingredient – had to be extracted by experienced chicle-hunters from trees in the forests of the southern Maya lowlands. The chicleros, an improvident but courageous group of rascals on the whole (I used to know some), cut hundreds of trails through the Petén, uncovering dozens of heretofore unknown Maya cities.

 The world-directions as discovered by de Rosny, and the associated colors later discovered by Eduard Seler.


The natives of Yucatan are, among all the inhabitants of New Spain, especially deserving of praise for three things: First, that before the Spaniards came they made use of characters and letters, with which they wrote out their histories, their ceremonies, and the order of sacrifices to their idols, and their calendars, in books made of bark of a certain tree. These were on very long strips, a quarter or a third (of a yard) in width, doubled and folded, so that they resembled a bound book in quarto, a little larger or smaller. These letters and characters were understood only by the priests of the idols (who in that language are called Ahkins) and a few principal natives. Afterwards some of our friars learned to understand and read them, and even wrote them [my italics].35

modern Yucatec.

Maudslay by his artist Annie Hunter.








Whorf’s research led him to believe, as his literary executor John Carroll has said, that “the strange grammar of Hopi might betoken a different mode of perceiving and conceiving things on the part of a native speaker of Hopi,”22 a hypothesis that became enormously influential in intellectual circles through a series of popular articles that he wrote for the MIT Technology Review. If Whorf (and his mentor Sapir) were right, then perhaps all of us have been conditioned in our view of the world and reality by the particular grammar in which we think and speak.


cult of time 


 Some thirty-five years ago, Mérida was Mexico’s quietest backwater, a gleaming white city of largely one-story houses, with many bronzed Maya women clad in dazzling white huipils in the streets and markets; Yucatec Maya could still be heard throughout, and it had a deserved reputation as being a safe, spotlessly clean provincial capital. 



