Dystopia(n) Matters: On the Page, on Screen, on Stage

Dystopia is no doubt relevant if we think of it as a “concerted, strategic and practically oriented reflection on a future” 

Krishan Kumar traces the genealogy of dystopia, stressing the idea that it “emerged in the wake of utopia”. According to Kumar, “[T]he earliest forms [of utopia] seem to have been satires on the rationalist and scientific utopias of More and Bacon

As Davis concludes, “[D]ystopia serves not to highlight the futility and folly of all utopian aspirations, but to remind us of its historically and biographically rooted origins and limits”. 

The critical dystopia, Fortunati insists, “prefigure[s] 
 a horizon of hope”, “showing the reader a road that must start in the present, a dialectic that must begin from now-here”. 

dystopia is needed because it presents us a gloomy future we have definitely to avoid, but it really only works when it is assisted by its counterpart, eutopia, which “remind[s] us that better, while difficult, is possible”. 

One of the first utopias I ever read, I and many others thought of as a dystopia, while the author and many others were quite clear that it was a eutopia. That book was B.F. Skinner’s  Walden Two (1948), and even though I read it negatively, I had to admit that Skinner saw it positively, and he said so many times. As a result, it is clear from both internal and external evidence together with the fact that a number of people decided to establish intentional communities modelled on Skinner’s vision as expressed in the book that a book could be both a eutopia and a dystopia depending on the reader (on Walden Two communities, see Kuhlman). 


 I contend that the dystopia, mostly without the religious element, does the same thing, although often only implicitly. The dystopia is presented as what has happened as a result of human behaviour, of people messing up, as, in the Old Testament version, sin. And given the resurgence of Christian dystopianism, the Old Testament version is still relevant. But the message is also quite clearly, it does not have to be like this. And to me this is the important point.

We need the dystopia to remind us that our dystopia could get worse, but we need the eutopia even more to remind us that better, while difficult, is possible. 

pessimism of the intellect, optimism of the will

Lyman Tower Sargent characterises anti-utopia as “a non-existent society described in considerable detail and normally located in time and space that the author intended the contemporaneous reader to view as a criticism of utopianism or of some particular eutopia

 a community whose hegemonic principles pretend to its being more perfectly organized than any thinkable alternative, while our representative 
 “camera eye” and value-monger finds out it is significantly less perfect than an alternative, a polemic nightmare. 

the scepticism of the conservative eighteenth-century intellectuals”, and not necessarily with the rise of totalitarian systems in the first half of the twentieth century (Vieira, 2010: 16). She points out that the term 
 “dystopia” is used not only as a general designation of “imaginary places that were worse than real places” but also as a literary sub-genre that evolved from both satirical utopia and anti-utopia, rejecting “the idea that man can reach perfection”

What they parody, ridicule or reject are the particular “utopian” solutions and their consequences. 


 Baccolini, Raffaella / Tom Moylan (eds.) (2003),  

. If in Europe utopia is seen as a fictional (“unreal”) alternative to the existing state of affairs, the utopian experiment in America becomes literally more “real” than the reality it seeks to alter or escape, particularly if that reality is seen as only a transitory stage in the progress towards the utopia of popular/hegemonic ideology. In other words, the utopian experiment stands in opposition not only to the imperfect present but also to another vision of the allegedly perfect future. 

Seen in this context, American culture offers a very unique situation in which both literary and “realised” utopias appear in a country that projects itself as a utopia. Thus, we have a case of a utopia-in-a-utopia, resembling that of a text-in-a-text, which has far-reaching consequences for the status of practical utopian experiments or texts calling for a radically different mode of social organisation. Whilst the position of the futuristic literary utopias can, in principle, be that of a manifestation or even self-description of the mainstream “utopian” culture, the relationship between the latter and the more radical proposals may become mutually antagonistic.

. American anti-utopia was neither a response to nor a parody of a mode of discourse but an attack, satirical or otherwise, not so much on utopianism as a project or theory as on its practical manifestations. The situation is made even more interesting by the fact that in the early stages of its history and development America itself was supposed to embody the utopian ideal. Early colonies such as Pennsylvania, South Carolina and Georgia were expressly intended as ideal societies. Whilst early Puritan settlers firmly believed in the Millennium, by the beginning of the eighteenth century it was the secularised idea of the “city upon a hill”, a theocratic utopia, that seemed to be the dominant ideal, later strengthened by the persisting and apparently largely genuine cult of the Constitution, which can be seen as a contemporary reflection of its utopian origins.

dystopias are jeremiads”, because they are often similar, in their approach, to the “early Puritan sermons in New England” which “accus[ed] the people of backsliding, of losing the confidence of God (…[and went]) into great detail about the specific ways that the peoples (…[had]) erred”. The dystopia, Sargent contends, “mostly without the religious element, does 
 Fátima Vieira 
 3 
 
 the same thing, although often implicitly. The dystopia is presented as what has happened as a result of human behaviour, of people messing up”. 

own famously caustic comments on “utopian” socialism, many Marxists 

