I Want to Keep Smashing Myself Until I Am Whole

Almost three decades after Canetti’s passing (Zurich, 1994), here he is again, in America, a country he alternately ignored and derided. I can’t help but wonder which favor America will return on this occasion. I accepted the honor of putting Canetti between fresh covers because I, like pretty much everyone else during the past two years of pandemic-caused lockdown and crowd avoidance, became interested in “freedom”—rather, I became interested in why I’m often ashamed to speak that word, and why I’m often ashamed to admit that I’m ashamed to speak it, and so on. Perhaps my reaction has to do with the clunk of the verbiage itself—I can’t help but regard that “-dom” slapped onto the end as vaguely sadomasochistically sexual—or perhaps it’s the hint of sanctimony or sham piety with which it tends to be 

entire races—yearned and fought for collective freedoms and self-determined governance. Consider the innocence of early Zionism, or the patriotic fervor of Ottoman- and Habsburg-era Bulgarians, Romanians, Slovenes, Croats, and Poles. But sometime after the Second World War, in which Germany failed to re-create by force a perverse version of the empires that crumbled in the First, these notions of autonomy suffered a contraction, especially in America: now the entity seeking freedom was doing so not in an imperial but in a national context and was more likely to be the subgroup (female, gay, black), or the individual subsumed into multiple groups at the intersections of depersonalized identity.


 might be that my discomfort with the word “freedom” is only my discomfort with the exclusionary politics of those who abuse it (in much the same way, I’m disturbed by the exemptionary politics of those who abuse “liberty”). But then it might also have to do with the fact that I was born in 1980 and so grew up in an America that was still cheering the collapse of the Soviet Union when it was attacked by religious fundamentalists and reacted by declaring war on the world—an endless technologized jihad of surveillance and control that by now has lasted half my lifetime. Whatever the cause of my word-aversion, the fact remains: as I became an adult, I found it harder and harder to write the word “free” without irony and to read the word “free” without thinking that it referred to something that cost nothing. As a writer—not just as a writer in a free society, but as a writer period—it sometimes feels as if I possess, or would be able to possess, every freedom except one, which is the freedom to be unpolitical, the freedom not to have my every sentence be judged by the terms of my identity, as construed by each of my readers.
 Canetti, exile, cosmopole, polyglot, was among the first modern voices who refused this—among the first modern voices who refused identity and politics and their conflation in what’s now called “identity politics,” which his Viennese experience told him was the primary sign, or symptom, of the individual’s absorption by the crowd, or of the crowd’s co-option of selfhood and independent conscience. Canetti’s scorning of this crowd-consumed human was akin to his scorning of Freudian orthodoxy and of the fashionable Marxist, or Marxish, Frankfurt thought of Adorno, Horkheimer, Marcuse, and Habermas: he abhorred the former’s tendency to relate all behavior and ideation to trauma, just as he abhorred the latter’s tendency to relate all behavior and ideation to capital. “I want to keep smashing myself until I am whole,” this indefinable, unassimilable Spanish-Jewish, Ottoman-Balkan, Viennese, British, Swiss world citizen wrote in one of his Aufzeichnungen from the start of the 1950s, when Europe had been smashed and wholeness was no longer the property of crowds but the ambition of the information-crowded individual.
 Canetti’s destructive-creative act takes the violence he witnessed in Vienna and turns it inward: the smashing that he’s advocating is one in which we individually shatter our superficial vocabularies

He wavers uncertainly between his descendants and his forebears. Which are more reliable? Who offer him more?
 
 No sooner does the mere possibility of success appear on the horizon, than he tries to escape. His mistrust of success has become so great that he wants only to want it, not to have it.
 
 I should like to contain everything within myself yet stay quite simple. That is hard. For I don’t want to lose this variety, much as I wish to be simple.
 The mystic’s nature is not mine; it seems to me the mystic sacrifices too much for his happiness.
 
 It all depends on this: with whom we confuse ourselves.
 
 This tenderness toward everything we have seen before, and this revulsion toward so much we are seeing now.
 
 His fear of all his endless little notebooks! By now they are mounting into the hundreds, every page covered, and he never opens a one of them! This prolific writer of nothing, what is so important for him to tell no one?


My earliest memory is dipped in red. I come out of a door on the arm of a maid, the floor in front of me is red, and to the left a staircase goes down, equally red. Across from us, at the same height, a door opens, and a smiling man steps forth, walking toward me in a friendly way. He steps right up close to me, halts, and says: “Show me your tongue.” I stick out my tongue, he reaches into his pocket, pulls out a jackknife, opens it, and brings the blade all the way to my tongue. He says: “Now we’ll cut off his tongue.” I don’t dare pull back my tongue, he comes closer and closer, the blade will touch me any second. In the last moment, he pulls back the knife, saying: “Not today, tomorrow.” He snaps the knife shut again and puts it back in his pocket.
 Every morning, we step out of the door and into the red hallway, the door opens, and the smiling man appears. I know what he’s going to say and I wait for the command to show my tongue. I know he’s going to cut it off, and I get more and more scared each time. That’s how the day starts, and it happens very often.
 
 I kept it to myself and asked my mother about it only much later. She could tell by the ubiquitous red that it was the guesthouse in Carlsbad, where she had spent the summer of 1907 with my father and me. To take care of the two-year-old baby, she had brought along a nanny from Bulgaria, a girl who wasn’t even fifteen. Every morning at the crack of dawn, the girl went out holding the child on her arm; she spoke only Bulgarian, but got along fine in the lively town, and was always back punctually with the child. Once, she was seen on the street with an unknown young man, she couldn’t say anything about him, a chance 

Every Friday, the Gypsies came. On Friday, the Jewish homes prepared everything for the Sabbath. The house was cleaned from top to bottom, the Bulgarian girls scooted all over the place, the kitchen hummed with activity, no one had time for me. I was all alone and waiting for the Gypsies, my face pressed against the garden window of the gigantic living room. I lived in panic fear of them. I assume it was the girls who also told me about Gypsies during the long evenings in the darkness. I thought about their stealing children and was convinced that they were after me.
 But despite my fear, I wouldn’t have missed seeing them; it was a splendid sight they offered. The courtyard gate had been opened wide for them, for they needed space. They came like an entire tribe: in the middle, tall and erect, a blind patriarch, the great-grandfather, as I was told, a handsome, white-haired old man; he walked very slowly, leaning on two grown granddaughters right and left and wearing colorful rags. Around him, thronging densely, there were Gypsies of all ages, very few men, almost nothing but women, and countless children, the infants in their mother’s arms; the rest sprang about, but never moved very far from the proud old man, who always remained the center. The whole procession had something strangely dense about it, I never otherwise saw so many people huddling so close together as they moved along; and in

Sometimes, when Grandfather Canetti was in the store, I was taken over to his house to pay respects to my grandmother. She sat on the Turkish divan, smoking and drinking strong coffee. She always stayed home, she never went out; I can’t recall ever seeing her outside the house. Her name was Laura and, like Grandfather, she came from Adrianople. He called her “Oro,” which actually means “gold,” I never understood her name. Of all the relatives, she was the one that remained most Turkish. She never got up from her divan, I don’t even know how she ever got there, for I never saw her walking, and she would sigh from time to time and drink another cup of coffee and smoke. She would greet me with a lamenting tone and, having said nothing to me, she let me go, lamenting. 

she must have suffered under Grandfather, who was fiendishly lively.
 Wherever he appeared, he was always instantly the center, which I didn’t realize at the time; he was feared in his family, a tyrant who could weep hot tears if he wanted to. He felt most comfortable with his grandsons, who bore his name. Among friends and acquaintances, indeed throughout the Sephardic community, he was popular for his beautiful voice, which women particularly succumbed to. Whenever he was invited anywhere, he never took Grandmother along; he couldn’t stand her stupidity and her continuous wailing. He was instantly surrounded by a big circle of people, told stories in which he played many parts, and on special occasions, he yielded to entreaties to sing.


A huge mulberry tree stood there, with low branches and easy to climb. I was not allowed to climb it, but Mother never passed it without showing me a branch at the top; it was her hiding place, where she used to sit as a young girl when she wanted to read undisturbed. She would steal up there with her book and sit there as quiet as a mouse, and she did it so cleverly that they couldn’t see her from below, and when they called her, she didn’t 

hear, because she liked the book so much; she read all her books up there. Not far from the mulberry tree, steps led up to the house; the residential rooms were higher than in our house, but the corridors were dark. We would walk through many rooms until the last room, where Grandfather sat in an armchair, a small, pale man, always warmly bundled in scarves and tartans; he was sickly.



 It took a long time; no one grew tired of it, and people kept standing around in a dense throng. I can’t see Father or Mother among them, I can’t see any of the individual people who made up my life. I only see them all together, and if I hadn’t used the word so frequently later on, I would say 

. Later I found out that they had fallen in love during such conversations, and while neither of them had managed to make their dream of the theater come true—both had passionately wanted to act—they did succeed in getting married despite a great deal of opposition.


One day, the courtyard was filled with smoke; a few of our girls ran out into the street and promptly came back with the excited news that a neighborhood house was on fire. It was already all in flames and about to burn up. Instantly, the three houses around our courtyard emptied, and except for my grandmother, who never rose from her divan, all the tenants ran out toward the blaze. It happened so fast that they forgot all about me. I was a little scared to be all alone like that; also I felt like going out, perhaps to the fire, perhaps even more in the direction I saw them all running in. So I ran through the open courtyard gate out into the street, which I was not allowed to do, and I wound up in the racing torrent of people. Luckily, I soon caught sight of two of our older girls, and since they wouldn’t have changed directions for anything in the world, they thrust me between themselves and hastily pulled me along. They halted at some distance from the conflagration, perhaps so as not to endanger me, and thus, for the first time in my life, I saw a burning house. It was already far gone; beams were collapsing and sparks were flying. The evening was gathering, it slowly became dark, and the fire shone brighter and brighter. But what made an even greater impact on me than the blazing house was the people moving around it.

This scene, which has remained unforgettable for me, later merged into the works of a painter, so that I no longer could say what was original and what was added by those paintings. I was nineteen, in Vienna, when I stood before Brueghel’s pictures. I instantly recognized the many little people of that fire in my childhood. The pictures were as familiar to me as if I had always moved among them. I felt a tremendous attraction to them and came over every day. That part of my life which had commenced with the fire continued immediately in these paintings, as though fifteen years had not gone by in between. Brueghel became the most important painter for me; but I did not absorb him, as so many later things, by contemplation and reflection. I found him present within me as though, certain that I would have to come to him, he had been awaiting me for a long time.

His life, in which nothing, absolutely nothing, happened. He embarked on no adventures, he was in no war. He was never in prison, he never killed anyone. He neither won nor lost a fortune. All he ever did was live in this century. But that alone was enough to give his life dimension, both of feeling and of thought.
 

To mangle a sentence into a landscape.

Every forgotten idea crops up again on the other side of the world.
 

Your original sin: you opened your mouth. As long as you listen, you are innocent.

A labyrinth made of all the paths one has taken.

The day of her arrival, I didn’t see him, he didn’t come to the nursery that evening. But he reappeared the very next morning and got my little brother to talk. “Georgie,” he said; “Canetti,” said the boy; “Two,” said Father; “Three,” said the boy; “Four,” said Father; “Burton,” said the boy; “Road,” said Father; “West,” said the boy; “Didsbury,” said Father; “Manchester,” said the boy; “England,” said Father; and I, in the end, very loudly and superfluously, said, “Europe.” So our address was together again. There are no words that I have retained more sharply, they were my father’s last words.

He went down to breakfast as usual. Before long, we heard loud yells. The governess dashed down the stairs, I at her heels. By the open door to the dining room, I saw my father lying on the floor. He was stretched out full length, between the table and the fireplace, very close to the fireplace, his face was white, he had foam on his mouth, Mother knelt at his side, crying: “Jacques, speak to me, speak to me, Jacques, Jacques, speak to me!” She kept shouting it over and over again, people came, our neighbors the Brockbanks, a Quaker couple, strangers walked in off the street. I stood by the door, Mother grabbed her head, tore hair out, and kept shouting. I took a timid step into the room, toward my father, I didn’t understand, I wanted to ask him, then I heard someone say: “Take the child away.” The Brockbanks gently took my arm, led me out into the street, and into their front yard.


 But the real reason was that I had to learn German first. I was eight years old, I was to attend school in Vienna, and my age would put me in the third grade of elementary school there. My mother could not bear the thought of my perhaps not being accepted into this grade because of my ignorance of the language, and she was resolved to teach me German in a jiffy.
 Not very long after our arrival, we went to a bookshop; she asked for an English-German grammar, bought the first book they showed her, took me home immediately, and began instruction. How can I depict that instruction believably? I know how it went—how could I forget?—but I still can’t believe it myself.
 We sat at the big table in the dining room, I on the narrower side, with a view of the lake and the sails. She sat around the corner to my left and held the textbook in such a way that I couldn’t look in. She always kept it far from me. “You don’t need it,” she said, “you can’t understand it yet anyway.” But despite this explanation, I felt she was withholding the book like a secret. She read a German sentence to me and had me repeat it. Disliking my accent, she made me repeat the sentence several times, until it struck her as tolerable. But this didn’t occur often, for she derided me for my accent, and since I couldn’t stand her derision for anything in the world, I made an effort and soon pronounced the sentence correctly. Only then did she tell me what the sentence meant in English. But this she never repeated, I had to note it instantly and for all time. Then she quickly went on to the next sentence and followed the same procedure; as soon as I pronounced it correctly, she translated 

His eyes grew accustomed to the darkness. But he could not read; that was a great pity. He pulled down one volume after another, turned over the pages, contrived to make out many of the names. Later on he scrambled up onto the ladder. He wanted to know if the upper shelves had any secrets to hide. He tumbled off it and said: I haven’t hurt myself! The floor is hard. The books are soft. In a bookshop one falls on books. He could have made a castle of books, but he regarded disorder as vulgar and, as he took out each new volume, he replaced the one before. His back hurt. Perhaps he was only tired. At home he would have been asleep long ago. Not here, excitement kept him awake. But his eyes could not even make out the largest titles anymore and that annoyed him. He worked out how many years he would be able to spend reading in this shop without ever going out into the street or to that silly school. Why could he not stay here always? He could easily save up to buy himself a small bed. His mother would be afraid. So was he, but only a little, because it was so very quiet. The gas lamps in the street went out. Shadows crept along the walls. So there were ghosts. During the night they came flying here and crouched over the books. Then they read. They needed no light, they had such big eyes. Now he would not touch a single book on the upper shelves, nor on the lower ones either.

He crept under the counter and his teeth chattered. Ten thousand books and a ghost crouching over each one. That was why it was so quiet. Sometimes he heard them turn over a page. They read as fast as he did himself. He might have grown used to them, but there were ten thousand of them and perhaps one of them would bite. Ghosts get cross if you brush against them, they think you are making fun of them. He made himself as small as possible; they flew over him without touching him. 

“My master commanded me to learn three thousand characters every day and to write down another thousand each evening. In the short winter days the sun went down early and I had not finished my task. I carried my little tablet onto the veranda which faced the west and finished my writing there. Late in the evening, when I was going through what I had written, I could no longer overcome my weariness. So I placed two buckets of water behind me. When I grew too sleepy, I took off my gown and emptied the first bucket over myself. Naked, I sat down to my work again. Gradually I would grow warmer and sleepy again. Then I would use the second bucket. With the help of two shower baths I was nearly always able to complete my task. In that winter I entered my ninth year.”
 Moved and ablaze with admiration, he clapped the book to. “That was the way they used to learn! A fragment from the childhood recollections of the Japanese scholar Arai Hakuseki.

An old man who learned late,” Plato called his opponent, the cynic philosopher Antisthenes.

That night he saw a man standing, bound fast, on the terrace of a temple, defending himself with wooden clubs from the savage attacks of two upright jaguars on his left and right. Both animals were decked with strange streamers in all colors. They gnashed their teeth, roared, and rolled their eyes so wildly that it made the blood run cold. The sky was black and narrow, and had hidden his stars in his pocket. Tears of glass trickled out of the eyes of the prisoner and splintered into a thousand pieces as they reached the pavement. But as nothing further happened, the savage combat grew boring and made the spectator yawn. Then by chance his eye fell on the feet of the jaguars. They had human feet. Aha, thought the spectator—a lanky, learned man—these are sacrificial priests of ancient Mexico. They are performing a sacred comedy. The victim knows well that he must die in the end. The priests are disguised as jaguars but I see through them at once.
 The jaguar on the right seized a heavy stone wedge and drove it into the victim’s heart. One edge of it clove sharp through the breastbone. Kien closed his eyes, dazzled. 

But why blame himself? He was in the middle of it. Where are you? Where are you? The flames dazzled him. And what the devil was this, wherever he reached out, he could get hold of nothing but shrieking human beings. They clutched hold of him with all their strength. He hurled them from him, they came back to him. They crept to him from below and entwined his knees; from above his head burning torches rained down on him. He was not looking up yet he saw them clearly. They seized on his ears, his hair, his shoulders. They enchained him with their bodies. Bedlam broke loose. “Let me go,” he shouted, “I don’t know you. What do you want with me! How can I rescue the books!”
 But one of them had thrown himself against his mouth, and clung fast to his tightly closed lips. He wanted to speak again, but he could not open his mouth. He implored them in his mind: I can’t save them! I can’t save them! He wanted to cry, but where were his tears? His eyes too were closed fast; human beings were pressing against them too. He tried to step free of them, he lifted his right leg high in the air; in vain, it was dragged back again, 

dragged down by a burden of burning humankind, dragged down by a leaden weight. He abhorred them, these greedy creatures; could they not be satisfied with the life they had had? He loathed them. He would have liked to hurt them, torment them, reproach them; he could do nothing, nothing! Not for one moment did he forget why he was there. They might hold his eyes forcibly shut, but in his spirit he could see mightily. He saw a book growing in every direction at once until it filled the sky and the earth and the whole of space to the very horizon. At its edges a reddish glow, slowly, quietly, devoured it. Proud, silent, uncomplaining, it endured a martyr’s death. Men screamed and shrieked, the book burned without a word. Martyrs do not cry out, saints do not cry out.
 Then a voice spoke; in it was all knowledge, for it was the voice of God: “There are no books here. All is vanity.” And at once Kien knew that the voice spoke truth. Lightly, he threw off the burning mob and jumped out of the fire. He was saved. Did it hurt then? Terribly, he answered himself, but not so much as people usually think. He was extraordinarily happy about the voice. He could see himself, dancing away from the altar. At a little distance, he turned round. He was tempted to laugh at the empty fire.


The woman who sat opposite was certainly a great deal younger, but she already had four children; Therese had none. “Children last.” That sounded straightforward enough, but what did she really mean by it? She probably wanted no children; neither did he. He had never thought about children. For what purpose had she said that?

Perhaps she took him for a person of no morals. But she knew his life. For eight years she had been aware of all his habits. She knew that he was a man of character. Did he ever go out at night? Had a woman ever called on him, even for a quarter of an hour? When she had first taken up her post with him, he had most emphatically explained to her that he received no visitors on principle, male or female, of whatever age, from infants in arms to octogenarians. She was to send everyone away. “I have no time!” Those had been his very words. What devil had got into her? That shameless cobbler, perhaps? She was an innocent ingenuous creature; how otherwise, uneducated as she was, could she have acquired so great a love for books? But that dirty fellow’s pantomime had been all too obvious. His gestures were self-explanatory; a child, without even knowing the reasons for his movements, would have understood that he had a woman in his arms. People of that kind, capable of losing control of themselves in the open street, ought to be segregated in asylums. They induce ugly thoughts in hardworking people. She was a hardworking woman. The cobbler had insinuated ideas into her head. Why else should children have occurred to her? It was not impossible that she might have heard something about such things. Women talk among themselves. She had perhaps been present at a birth,

when she was in some other service. What did it signify if she did indeed know all there was to know? Better perhaps than if he had to explain it to her himself. There was a certain bashfulness in her expression; at her age it was faintly comic.
 I never thought of asking anything so vulgar of her; it did not cross my mind. I have no time. I need six hours’ sleep. I work until twelve, at six o’clock I get up. Dogs and other animals may do such things by day. Perhaps she expects something of the kind from marriage. Hardly. Children last. Fool. All she meant was that she knew what was necessary. She knew the chain of circumstances whose conclusion is the perfected child. She was trying to explain herself gracefully. She took the occasion of this little incident, the children were importunate, the words were apt, but her eyes were fixed on me alone; it did for a confession. Most understandable. Such admissions are naturally painful. I married because of the books; children last. That means nothing at all. I remember her saying that children learned too little. I read out to her a paragraph of Arai Hakuseki. She was quite carried away. That was how she first betrayed herself. Who knows how otherwise I could have guessed her feeling for books. At that moment we were drawn together. Probably she only meant to remind me of that. She is still the same. Her views on children

have not altered since then. My friends are her friends. My enemies will be her enemies. The brief speech of an innocent mind. She had no conception of any other relationship. I must be careful. She might be frightened. I shall act very cautiously. How shall I open the subject to her? It is difficult to speak of it. I have no books on it. Buy one? What would the bookseller think? I am not that kind of man. Send someone for it? But who? She herself—for shame—my own wife! How can I be so cowardly. I must try myself. I, myself. But suppose she is unwilling. Suppose she screams. The people in the other flats—the caretaker—the police—the mob. But they can do nothing to me. I am married to her. I have a right. How disgusting! How came I to think of it? I am the one whom that cobbler has infected. Shame on you. After forty years. And now to behave in this way. I shall spare her. Children last. If I only knew what she meant. Sphinx.
 The mother of the four children stood up. “Look out!

Also I love the fact that he became known so late and that despite, or even because of, this he never gave up hope. Despite the many falsifications of life that he allowed into his “ideal” tales, he loved life as it is.
 For me, this is the sole criterion of the epic talent: a knowledge of life even at its most horrific, a passionate love for it nonetheless, a love that never despairs, for it is inviolable even in its desperation. Nor is it really tied to a belief, for it originates in the variety of life, its unknown, astonishing, wondrous variety, its unpredictable twists and turns. For those who cannot stop pursuing life, it changes in the pursuit into a hundred new, overwhelmingly remarkable creatures; and for those who just as tirelessly chase after all hundred of them, they will change into a thousand others, all just as new.


Stendhal’s head was filled with things of “culture”—pictures, books, music—many of which are as important to me today as they were to him then. Many more are indifferent or repellently “sentimental”; the important point is how he was taken up by these things. He extracts from everything only that which is like himself. Thus I can perhaps console myself for being so preoccupied with barbarians and religions, since it is possible that they have become very much like me. Whether it’s Canova or Wotruba, the accident of birth plays only an external role here. The passion with which one possesses every object and the passion with which one distances oneself in contemplation of it—that is everything.
 
Note: Referenser

His face—was it one of those which anyone would remember from a single glance? He stopped in front of the mirror outside a hairdresser’s and surveyed his features. Watery blue eyes, and no cheeks at all. His forehead, ridged as a rock face, from which his nose plunged at right angles toward the abyss, an edge dizzily narrow. At its base, almost hidden, cowered two minute black insects. No one would have guessed them to be nostrils. His mouth as the slot of a machine. Two sharp lines, like artificial scars, ran from his temples to his chin and met at its point. These and his nose divided his long and lean face into five strips of a terrifying narrowness; narrow, but strictly symmetrical; there was no room to linger anywhere and Kien did not linger.

Ladie
Note: I am a ladies mann

