A Universe From Nothing: Why There Is Something Rather Than Nothing

Of course, one can ask, and many do, “Where do the laws of physics come from?” as well as more suggestively, “Who created these laws?” Even if one can answer this first query, the petitioner will then often ask, “But where did that come from?” or “Who created that?” and so 
Note: Bra intro till essé

Who created the creator?” After all, what is the difference between arguing in favor of an eternally existing creator versus an eternally existing universe without one?


theories that underlie much of modern physics—all suggest that getting something from nothing is not a problem. Indeed, something from nothing may have been required for the universe to come into being. Moreover, all signs suggest that this is how our universe could have arisen.


But therein, in my opinion, lies the intellectual bankruptcy of much of theology and some of modern philosophy. For surely “nothing” is every bit as physical as “something,” especially if it is to be defined as the “absence of something.” It then behooves us to understand precisely the physical nature of both these quantities. And without science, any definition is just words.


Again, I suspect it would have been . . . at one time. But, as I shall describe, we have learned that space and time can themselves spontaneously appear, so now we are told that even this “nothing” is not really the nothing that matters.

After all, if there were no potential for creation, then God couldn’t have created anything. It would be semantic hocus-pocus to assert that the potentially infinite regression is avoided because God exists outside nature and, therefore, the “potential” for existence itself is not a part of the nothingness from which existence arose.

While it is trivial mathematically to do so, once this term is on the right-hand side, where all the terms contributing to the energy of the universe reside, it represents something completely different from a physical perspective—namely a new contribution to the total energy. But what kind of stuff could contribute such a term?
 The answer is, nothing.
 By nothing, I do not mean nothing, but rather nothing—in this case, the nothingness we normally call empty space. That is to say, if I take a region of space and get rid of everything within it—dust, gas, people, and even the radiation passing through, namely absolutely everything within that region—if the remaining empty space weighs something, then that would correspond to the existence of a cosmological term such as Einstein invented.
 Now, this makes Einstein’s cosmological constant seem even crazier! For any fourth grader will tell you how much energy is contained in nothing, even if they don’t know what energy is. The answer must be nothing.


What all this implies is that, for very short times, so short that you cannot measure their speed with high precision, quantum mechanics allows for the possibility that these particles act as if they are moving faster than light! But, if they are moving faster than light, Einstein tells us they must be behaving as if they are moving backward in time!
 Feynman was brave enough to take this apparently crazy possibility seriously and explore its implications. He drew the following diagram for an electron moving about, periodically speeding up in the middle of its voyage to faster-than-light speed.

If this doesn’t bother you, then consider the following: for a little while, even if you start out with just a single particle, and end with a single particle, for a short time there are three particles moving about:
  
 In the brief middle period, for at least a little while, something has spawned out of nothing! Feynman beautifully describes this apparent paradox in his 1949 paper, “A Theory of Positrons,” with a delightful wartime analogy:  
 It is as though a bombardier watching a single road through the bomb-sight of a low-flying plane suddenly sees three roads and it is only when two of them come together and disappear again that he realizes that he has simply passed over a long switchback in a single road.  
 As long as this time period during this “switchback” is so short that we cannot measure all the particles directly, quantum mechanics and relativity imply that not only is this weird situation allowed, it is required. The particles that appear and disappear in timescales too short to measure are called virtual particles.

After all of this work, we now have a good picture of what the inside of a proton actually looks like. There may be three quarks contained therein, but there is also a lot of other stuff. In particular, virtual particles reflecting the particles and fields that convey the strong force between quarks are popping in and out of existence all the time.

In principle, particles can therefore carry almost infinite energy as long as they disappear in almost infinitesimally short times.


. As I have described already, the laws of quantum mechanics imply that, on very small scales, for very short times, empty space can appear to be a boiling, bubbling brew of virtual particles and fields wildly fluctuating in magnitude. 

However, during inflation, these quantum fluctuations can determine when what would otherwise be different small regions of space end their period of exponential expansion. As different regions stop inflating at slightly (microscopically) different times, the density of matter and radiation that results when the false vacuum energy gets released as heat energy in these different regions is slightly different in each one.
 The pattern of density fluctuations that result after inflation—arising, I should stress, from the quantum fluctuations in otherwise empty space—turns out to be precisely in agreement with the observed pattern of cold spots and hot spots on large scales in the cosmic microwave background radiation. While consistency is not proof, of course, there is an increasing view among cosmologists that, once again, if it walks like a duck and looks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it is probably a duck. And if inflation indeed is responsible for all the small fluctuations in the density of matter and radiation that would later result in the gravitational collapse of matter into galaxies and stars and planets and people, then it can be truly said that we all are here today because of quantum fluctuations in what is essentially nothing.
 This is so remarkable I want to stress it again. Quantum fluctuations, which otherwise would have been completely invisible, get frozen by inflation and emerge afterward as density fluctuations that produce everything we can see! If we are all stardust, as I have written, it is also true, if inflation happened, that we all, literally, emerged from quantum nothingness.


And the average total Newtonian gravitational energy of each object in our universe is equal to nothing. Enjoy the thought while you can, if you are so inclined, because, if all this is true, we live in perhaps the worst of all universes one can live in, at least as far as the future of life is concerned.


The structures we can see, like stars and galaxies, were all created by quantum fluctuations from nothing. 

Recall that the domination of the expansion of our universe by the energy of seemingly empty space was inferred from the fact that this expansion is speeding up. And, just as with inflation, as described in the last chapter, our observable universe is at the threshold of expanding faster than the speed of light. And with time, because of the accelerated expansion, things will only get worse.
 This means that, the longer we wait, the less we will be able to see. Galaxies that we can now see will one day in the future be receding away from us at faster-than-light speed, which means that they will become invisible to us. The light they emit will not be able to make progress against the expansion of space, and it will never again reach us. These galaxies will have disappeared from our horizon.


Only in the first seconds of a hot Big Bang, with an initial abundance of protons and neutrons that would result in something very close to the observed density of matter in visible galaxies today, and a density of radiation that would leave a remnant that would correspond precisely to the observed intensity of the cosmic microwave background radiation today, would nuclear reactions occur that could produce precisely the abundance of light elements, hydrogen and deuterium, helium and lithium, that we infer to have comprised the basic building blocks of the stars that now fill the night sky.



 I should point out, nevertheless, that even though incomplete data can lead to a false picture, this is far different from the (false) picture obtained by those who choose to ignore empirical data to invent a picture of creation that would otherwise contradict the evidence of reality (young earthers, for example), or those who instead require the existence of something for which there is no observable evidence whatsoever (like divine intelligence) to reconcile their view of creation with their a priori prejudices, or worse still, those who cling to fairy tales about nature that presume the answers before questions can even be asked.

For those who find it remarkable that we live in a universe of Something, just wait. Nothingness is heading on a collision course right toward us!” 

But the discovery that empty space has energy started a revision in thinking among many physicists about what is required in nature and what may be accidental.
 The catalyst for this new gestalt originates from the argument I gave in the last chapter: dark energy is measurable today because “now” is the only time in the history of the universe when the energy in empty space is comparable to the energy density in matter.
 Why should we be living at such a “special” time in the history of the universe? Indeed, this flies in the face of everything that has characterized science since Copernicus. We have learned that the Earth is not the center of the solar system and that the Sun is a star on the lonely outer edges of a galaxy that is merely one out of 400 billion galaxies in the observable universe. We have come to accept the “Copernican principle” that there is nothing special about our place and time in the universe.
 But with the energy of empty space being what it is, we do appear to live at a special time. This is shown best by the following illustration of a “brief history of time.”

So, in a universe with an energy of empty space merely 50 times bigger than that we observe, apparently no one would have been around today to try to measure the energy.
 Could this be telling us something? Shortly after the discovery of our accelerating universe, physicist Steven Weinberg proposed, based on an argument he had developed more than a decade earlier—before the discovery of dark energy—that the “Coincidence Problem” could therefore be solved if perhaps the value of the cosmological constant that we measure today were somehow “anthropically” selected. That is, if somehow there were many universes, and in each universe the value of the energy of empty space took a randomly chosen value based on some probability distribution among all possible energies, then only in those universes in which the value is not that different from what we measure would life as we know it be able to evolve. So maybe we find ourselves in a universe with a tiny energy in empty space because we couldn’t find ourselves in one with a much larger value. Put another way, it is not too surprising to find that we live in a universe in which we can live!
 This argument, however, makes mathematical sense only if there is a possibility that many different universes have arisen. Talking about many different universes can sound like an oxymoron. After all, traditionally the notion of universe has become synonymous with “everything that exists.”

The minute one chooses this definition for a universe, the possibility of other “universes”—regions that have always been and always will be causally disconnected from ours, like islands separated from any communication with one another by an ocean of space—becomes possible, at least in principle.
 Our universe is so vast that, as I have emphasized, something that is not impossible is virtually guaranteed to occur somewhere within it. Rare events happen all the time. You might wonder whether the same principle applies to the possibility of many universes, or a multiverse, as the idea is now known. It turns out that the theoretical situation is actually stronger than simply a possibility. A number of central ideas that drive much of the current activity in particle theory today appear to require a multiverse.
 I want to stress this because, in discussions with those who feel the need for a creator, the existence of a multiverse is viewed as a cop-out conceived by physicists who have run out of answers—or perhaps questions. This may eventually be the case, but it is not so now. Almost every logical possibility we can imagine regarding extending laws of physics as we know them, on small scales, into a more complete theory, suggests that, on large scales, our universe is not unique.


In any case, what Linde recognized is that, while quantum fluctuations during inflation may often push the field that drives inflation toward its lowest energy state, and thus provide a graceful exit, there is always the possibility that, in some regions, quantum fluctuations will drive the field toward yet higher energies, and hence away from values where inflation will end, so that inflation will continue unabated. Because such regions will expand for longer periods of time, there will be far more space that is inflating than that which is not. Within these regions, quantum fluctuations again will drive some subregions to exit inflation and thus stop expanding exponentially, but again there will be regions where quantum fluctuations will cause inflation to persist even longer. And so on.
 This picture, which Linde dubbed “chaotic inflation,” indeed resembles more familiar chaotic systems on Earth. Take boiling oatmeal, for example. At any point a bubble of gas may burst from the surface, reflecting regions where liquid at high temperature completes a phase transition to form a vapor. But between the bubbles the oatmeal is roiling and flowing. On large scales there is regularity—there are always bubbles popping somewhere. But locally, things are quite different depending upon where one looks. So it would be in a chaotically inflating 

 this picture, inflation is eternal. Some regions, indeed most of space, will go on inflating forever. Those regions that exit inflation will become separate, causally disconnected universes. I want to stress that a multiverse is inevitable if inflation is eternal, and eternal inflation is by far the most likely possibility in most, if not all, inflationary scenarios. As Linde put it in his 1986 paper:  
 The old question why our universe is the only possible one is now replaced by the question in which theories [of] the existence of mini-universes of our type [are] possible. This question is still very difficult, but it is much easier than the previous one. In our opinion, the modification of the point of view on the global structure of the universe and on our place in the world is one of the most important consequences of the development of the inflationary universe scenario.  

? Maybe all of the mysteries of particle theory can be solved by invoking the same mantra: if the universe were any other way, we could not live in it.


. The other conclusion is that the laws themselves are all that exist. These laws themselves require our universe to come into existence, to develop and evolve, and we are an irrevocable by-product of these laws. The laws may be eternal, or they too may have come into existence, again by some yet unknown but possibly purely physical process.

And here, I think it is extremely significant that a universe from nothing—in a sense I will take pains to describe—that arises naturally, and even inevitably, is increasingly consistent with everything we have learned about the world. This learning has not come from philosophical or theological musings about morality or other speculations about the human condition. It is instead based on the remarkable and exciting developments in empirical cosmology and particle physics that I have described.


Occam’s razor suggests that, if some event is physically plausible, we don’t need recourse to more extraordinary claims for its being.

Consider an electron-positron pair that spontaneously pops out of empty space near the nucleus of an atom and affects the property of that atom for the short time the pair exists. In what sense did the electron or positron exist before? Surely by any sensible definition they didn’t. 

: in a flat universe, and only in a flat universe, the average Newtonian gravitational energy of every object participating in the expansion is precisely zero.
 I emphasize that this was a falsifiable postulate. It didn’t have to be this way. Nothing required this except theoretical speculations based on considerations of a universe that could have arisen naturally from nothing, or at the very least, from almost nothing.


Just as Darwin, albeit reluctantly, removed the need for divine intervention in the evolution of the modern world, teeming with diverse life throughout the planet (though he left the door open to the possibility that God helped breathe life into the first forms), our current understanding of the universe, its past, and its future make it more plausible that “something” can arise out of nothing without the need for any divine guidance. Because of the observational and related theoretical difficulties associated with working out the details, I expect we may never achieve more than plausibility in this regard. But plausibility itself, in my view, is a tremendous step forward as we continue to marshal the courage to live meaningful lives in a universe that likely came into existence, and may fade out of existence, without purpose, and certainly without us at its center.


I would now like to describe how, if our universe arose from nothing, a flat universe, one with zero total Newtonian gravitational energy of every object, is precisely what we should expect. The argument is a little subtle—subtler than I have been able to describe in my popular lectures on the subject—so I am happy to have the space here to carefully try to lay it out.
 First, I want to be clear about what kind of “nothing” I am discussing at the moment. This is the simplest version of nothing, namely empty space. For the moment, I will assume space exists, with nothing at all in it, and that the laws of physics also exist. Once again, I realize that in the revised versions of nothingness that those who wish to continually redefine the word so that no scientific definition is practical, this version of nothing doesn’t cut the mustard. However, I suspect that, at the times of Plato and Aquinas, when they pondered why there was something rather than nothing, empty space with nothing in it was probably a good approximation of what they were thinking about.


Therefore, our observable universe can start out as a microscopically small region of space, which can be essentially empty, and still grow to enormous scales containing eventually lots of matter and radiation, all without costing a drop of energy, with enough matter and radiation to account for everything we see today!


suggestive that our universe arose though a process like that of inflation, a process whereby the energy of empty space (nothing) gets converted into the energy of something, during a time when the universe is driven closer and closer to being essentially exactly flat on all observable scales.
 While inflation demonstrates how empty space endowed with energy can effectively create everything we see, along with an unbelievably large and flat universe, it would be disingenuous to suggest that empty space endowed with energy, which drives inflation, is really nothing. In this picture one must assume that space exists and can store energy, and one uses the laws of physics like general relativity to calculate the consequences. So if we stopped here, one might be justified in claiming that modern science is a long way from really addressing how to get something from nothing. This is just the first step, however. As we expand our understanding, we will next see that inflation can represent simply the tip of a cosmic iceberg of nothingness.



The existence of energy in empty space—the discovery that rocked our cosmological universe and the idea that forms the bedrock of inflation—only reinforces something about the quantum world that was already well established in the context of the kinds of laboratory experiments I have already described. Empty space is complicated. It is a boiling brew of virtual particles that pop in and out of existence in a time so short we cannot see them directly.
 Virtual particles are manifestations of a basic property of quantum systems. At the heart of quantum mechanics is a rule that sometimes governs politicians or CEOs—as long as no one is watching, anything goes. Systems continue to move, if just momentarily, between all possible states, including states that would not be allowed if the system were actually being measured. These “quantum fluctuations” imply something essential about the quantum world: nothing always produces something, if only for an instant.


consider the electric field emanating from a charged object. It is definitely real. You can feel the static electric force on your hair or watch a balloon stick to a wall. However, the quantum theory of electromagnetism suggests that the static field is due to the emission, by the charged particles involved in producing the field, of virtual photons that have essentially zero total energy. These virtual particles, because they have zero energy, can propagate across the universe without disappearing, and the field due to the superposition of many of them is so real it can be felt.


Outside of the core of black holes is a radius called the “event horizon.” Inside an event horizon, no object can classically escape because the escape velocity exceeds the speed of light. Thus, even light emitted inside this region will not make it outside the event horizon.
 Now imagine a particle-antiparticle pair nucleates out of empty space just outside of the event horizon due to quantum fluctuations in that region. It is possible, if one of the particles actually falls within the event horizon, for it to lose enough gravitational energy by falling into the black hole that this energy exceeds twice the rest mass of either particle. This means that the partner particle can fly off to infinity and be observable without any violation of energy conservation. The total positive energy associated with the radiated particle is more than compensated by the loss of energy experienced by its partner particle falling into the black hole. The black hole can therefore radiate particles.


Nevertheless, all of these phenomena imply that, under the right conditions, not only can nothing become something, it is required to.


As a result, what might otherwise seem a small accomplishment (establishing a small asymmetry at early times) might instead be considered almost as the moment of creation. Because once an asymmetry between matter and antimatter was created, nothing could later put it asunder. The future history of a universe full of stars and galaxies was essentially written. Antimatter particles would annihilate with the matter particles in the early universe, and the remaining excess of matter particles would survive through the present day, establishing the character of the visible universe we know and love and inhabit.
 Even if the asymmetry were 1 part in a billion there would be enough matter left over to account for everything we see in the universe today. In fact, an asymmetry of 1 part in a billion or so is precisely what was called for, because today there are roughly 1 billion photons in the cosmic microwave background for every proton in the universe. The CMBR photons are the remnants, in this picture, of the early matter-antimatter annihilations near the beginning of time.


 it could have gone either way, was it then just a circumstantial accident that our universe became dominated by matter? Imagine standing on top of a tall mountain and tripping. The direction you fall was not preordained, but rather is an accident, depending upon which direction you were looking in or at what point in your stride you tripped. Perhaps similarly our universe is like that, and even if the laws of physics are fixed, the ultimate direction of the asymmetry between matter and antimatter was driven by some random initial condition (just as in the case of tripping down the mountain, the law of gravity is fixed and determines that you will fall, but your direction may be an accident). Once again, our very existence in that case would be an environmental accident.


. After describing how a matter-antimatter asymmetry might plausibly be generated in the early universe based on our new understanding of particle physics, he added a note that this provided one way of thinking about the answer to the question of why there is something rather than nothing: nothing is unstable.

One can speculate that the universe began in the most symmetrical state possible and that in such a state no matter existed; the universe was a vacuum. A second state existed, and in it matter existed. The second state had slightly less symmetry, but was also lower in energy. Eventually a patch of less symmetrical phase appeared and grew rapidly. The energy released by the transition found form in the creation of particles. This event might be identified with the big bang . . . The answer to the ancient question “Why is there something rather than nothing?” would be that “nothing” is unstable.  

Stephen Hawking was one of the first scientists to fully exploit this idea to the possible quantum mechanics of space-time (the union of our three-dimensional space along with one dimension of time to form a four-dimensional unified space-time system, as required by Einstein’s special theory of relativity). The virtue of Feynman’s methods was that focusing on all possible paths ends up meaning that the results can be shown to be independent of the specific space and time labels one applies to each point on each path. Because relativity tells us that different observers in relative motion will measure distance and time differently and therefore assign different values to each point in space and time, having a formalism that is independent of the different labels that different observers might assign to each point in space and time is particularly useful.
 And it is most useful perhaps in considerations of general relativity, where the specific labeling of space and time points becomes completely arbitrary, so that different observers at different points in a gravitational field measure distances and times differently, and all that ultimately determines the behavior of systems are geometric quantities like curvature, which turn out to be independent of all such labeling schemes.
 As I have alluded to several times, general relativity is not fully consistent with quantum mechanics, at least as far as we can tell, and therefore there is no completely unambiguous method to define Feynman’s sum-over-paths technique in general relativity. So we have to make some guesses in advance based on plausibility and check to see if the results make 

But let’s consider even stranger possibilities. Remember that, in the quantum theory of electromagnetism, particles can pop out of empty space at will as long as they disappear again on a time frame determined by the Uncertainty Principle. By analogy, then, in the Feynman quantum sum over possible space-time configurations, should one consider the possibility of small, possibly compact spaces that themselves pop in and out of existence? More generally, what about spaces that may have “holes” in them, or “handles” like donuts dunking into space-time?
 These are open questions. However, unless one can come up with a good reason for excluding such configurations from the quantum mechanical sum that determines the properties of the evolving universe, and to date no such good reason exists that I know of, then under the general principle that holds everywhere else I know of in nature—namely that anything that is not proscribed by the laws of physics must actually happen—it seems most reasonable to consider these possibilities.




1. In quantum gravity, universes can, and indeed always will, spontaneously appear from nothing. Such universes need not be empty, but can have matter and radiation in them, as long as the total energy, including the negative energy associated with gravity, is zero.
 2. In order for the closed universes that might be created through such mechanisms to last for longer than infinitesimal times, something like inflation is necessary. As a result, the only long-lived universe one might expect to live in as a result of such a scenario is one that today appears flat, just as the universe in which we live appears.
 The lesson is clear: quantum gravity not only appears to allow universes to be created from nothing—meaning, in this case, I emphasize, the absence of space and time—it may require them. “Nothing”—in this case no space, no time, no anything!—is unstable.


There, “nothing” meant empty but preexisting space combined with fixed and well-known laws of physics. Now the requirement of space has been removed.


We may wish to apply similar reasoning to the creation of our universe. All of the examples I have provided thus far indeed involve creation of something from what one should be tempted to consider as nothing, but the rules for that creation, i.e., the laws of physics, were preordained. Where do the rules come from?
 There are two possibilities. Either God, or some divine being who is not bound by the rules, who lives outside of them, determines them—either by whim or with malice aforethought—or they arise by some less supernatural mechanism.
 The problem with God determining the rules is that you can at least ask what, or who, determined God’s rules. Traditionally the response to this is to say that God is, among the Creator’s many other spectacular attributes, the cause of all causes, in the language of the Roman Catholic Church, or the First Cause (as per Aquinas), or in the language of Aristotle, moving the prime mover.


One thing is certain, however. The metaphysical “rule,” which is held as an ironclad conviction by those with whom I have debated the issue of creation, namely that “out of nothing nothing comes,” has no foundation in science. 

Moreover, those who argue that out of nothing nothing comes seem perfectly content with the quixotic notion that somehow God can get around this. But once again, if one requires that the notion of true nothingness requires not even the potential for existence, then surely God cannot work his wonders, because if he does cause existence from nonexistence, there must have been the potential for existence. To simply argue that God can do what nature cannot is to argue that supernatural potential for existence is somehow different from regular natural potential for existence. 

Quantum mechanics was developed from 1912 to 1927, primarily through the work of the brilliant and iconic Danish physicist Niels Bohr and the brilliant young hot-shots Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger and German physicist Werner Heisenberg. The quantum world first proposed by Bohr, and refined mathematically by Schrödinger and Heisenberg, defies all commonsense notions based on our experience with objects on a human scale. Bohr first proposed that electrons in atoms orbit around the central nucleus, as planets do around the Sun, but demonstrated that the observed rules of atomic spectra (the frequencies of light emitted by different elements) could only be understood if somehow the electrons were restricted to have stable orbits in a fixed set of “quantum levels” and could not spiral freely toward the nucleus. They could move between levels by absorbing or emitting only discrete frequencies, or quanta, of light—the very quanta that Max Planck had first proposed in 1905 as a way of understanding the forms of radiation emitted by hot objects.


Afterlives

  That was the story Khalifa’s father told him about his own struggles as a child. He told him because that is what fathers do to their children and because he wanted the boy to want more. 

Khalifa did not suspect with what nostalgia he would remember those days in later life.






The names were like music to many people who lived in the town, perhaps because most of them had not been to any of them. It was not that they could not imagine that they were all probably places of hardship and struggle and poverty, just like everywhere else, but they could not resist the strange beauty of those names.
    The old

boma

demurred

commiseration.

It was her aunt who told her she must never go up the hill, and also told stories about a snake that could swallow a child, and a tall man whose shadow flitted across the roofs of houses when the moon was full, and a dishevelled old woman who roamed the road to the sea and sometimes took the form of a leopard who raided the village for a goat or a baby.





them. 

In the deep silence of the night she heard soft hissing whispers creeping down and sometimes they came around and behind the house as well. Her aunt told her these were the invisibles which only women heard, but however sad and insistent their whispers she was not to open the door to

them.

If she spoke while her head was in the tank her voice had a demonic sound, which made her feel enormous. She did that sometimes even when she was not fetching water, put her head into the tank and made gloating, groaning sounds as if she was huge. 

Some of these stories were terrifying, like the one about a ragged bloated man with long dirty fingernails who walked on the road at night, dragging an iron chain behind him, looking to capture a little girl and take her to his burrow underground. You can always hear him coming because of the chain dragging on the ground. Many of her aunt’s stories were about dirty old people who stole little girls. 

Her aunt had a habit of nodding several times when she wanted to say something firmly, and because her face was narrow and drawn and her nose was pointed, she looked as if she was pecking at something in the air when she did so. 





She could feel something in her shrinking and turning edgy as if constantly expecting a scolding. There was so much that she was now not allowed to do because it was improper. She was not to touch a boy’s or a man’s hand even in greeting. She was not to speak to a boy or a man in the street unless he spoke to her and was someone she knew. She was not to smile at a stranger, and always to walk with her eyes cast slightly downwards to avoid accidental eye contact. 

Musen-Almanach für das Jahr 1798.

now it’s just where our betters store what we can’t afford

That wind brought the traders’ ships back from across the ocean. Their true destination was Mombasa or Zanzibar, prosperous towns with rich merchants ready to trade, but some of them straggled into other port towns, including theirs. The arrival of the ships was anticipated weeks in advance, and popular legends of captains and crew were revived and circulated once again: the chaos they brought 

and turned it into a campsite, the fabulous merchandise they hawked through the streets, a lot of it trinkety but some of it valuable beyond the vendors’ awareness, the thick rugs and rare perfumes, the shiploads of dates and salted kingfish and dried shark that they sold as job lots to the merchants, their notorious hunger for fruit and for mangoes in particular, and their unruly violence, which in the past had led to open battles in the streets and forced people to lock themselves in their houses in terror. The sailors filled the mosques to overflowing, and perfumed the air with their sea-salted, sweat-stained kanzus and kofias, which were often tarnished brown with grime. The area around the port bore the brunt of their excesses. The timber yard and Khalifa’s house were some distance into the town, and the only travellers who came their way were the street hawkers with their baskets

of gum and spices and perfume and necklaces and brass trinkets and thick-woven cloths dyed and embroidered in medieval colours. Sometimes high-stepping Suri merchants who had lost their way came marching through the neighbourhood, swinging their canes high as if they were crossing enemy territory. Children trooped behind them, calling out mocking words the strangers did not understand and making farting noises with their mouths, which the Suri were reputed to find especially insulting.
    If the timber yard and Khalifa’s house were a little out of the way for the traders and sailors, the open ground in front of the warehouses was not. They congregated there every day, and some of them camped there during the night. Sellers of fruit and grilled maize and cassava and coffee followed them there and transformed the area to something like the

buzzing tumultuous marketplace Khalifa had so longingly described to Hamza so many months before.

He tried to maintain a line between being a servant, which he did not wish to be, and a dependant who had obligations to the household but who made no presumptions.




ululations.

bilharzia.





mollified



sluice

baraza.

Kiongozi

Against Nature

violently hostile, a few that were fervently enthusiastic, but none that were completely indifferent. 

His family hardly concerned themselves about him; sometimes his father would come to visit him at his school: ‘Hello … be good and work hard … goodbye.

they let him pursue whatever studies pleased him and neglect all the others, not wanting to alienate this independent spirit through the interference of the school’s lay assistants.


Like cutting a cross-section anywhere through the stem of a fern, a fleur de lis seemed to be the only thing imprinted on the soft pulp of their aged 

An unspeakable feeling of pity descended on the young man for these mummies entombed in their Pompadour-style catafalques, all rococo

and wainscotting, for these gloomy sluggards who were living with their eyes constantly fixed on some nebulous Canaan, on some imaginary Palestine.


They were hedonists, enamoured of operettas and horse-racing, playing baccarat and lansquenet, gambling their fortunes on horses, on cards, and on all those pleasures dear to hollow men.

Nervy, ill at ease and indignant at the insignificance of ideas exchanged and received, he became like those people Nicole talked about, who ‘hurt all over’; he reached the point where he was constantly flaying himself, enduring the jingoistic nonsense and society gossip every morning in the newspapers, and exaggerating in his mind the extent of the success that an all-powerful public always and especially reserves for works written with neither style nor ideas.


By candlelight, blue tends toward an artificial green; if it is dark, like cobalt or indigo, it turns black; if it is light, it turns grey; if it is a soft true blue, like turquoise, it grows dull and cold. So, unless it was combined with some other colour by way of an additive, there could be no question of making blue the dominant note of a room.
 On the other hand, iron greys look gloomier and heavier still; pearl greys lose their azure and metamorphose into a dirty white; browns become lifeless and cold; as for dark greens such as emperor green and myrtle green, they have the same properties as deep blue and merge into black; so that left the paler greens such as peacock green, cinnabar green

and lacquer green, but there again the artificial light banishes their blues and preserves only their yellows, which in turn give off a false tone, a hint of cloudiness.


He brought this couple to Fontenay, accustomed as they were to the job of sick-nurse, to the regularity of distributing, hour by hour, spoonfuls of medicine and herbal infusions, to the rigid silence of cloistered monks who had no communication with the outside world and lived in rooms with barred doors and windows.



 He imagined himself to be between decks, on a brig, and, fascinated, he would study the marvellous mechanical fish, wound up like pieces of clockwork, which passed in front of the porthole or clung to the artificial seaweed; or better still, inhaling the odour of tar which was sprayed into the room before he entered, he would examine the coloured engravings hanging on the walls, representing, as in the offices of steamship agencies and at Lloyd’s, steamers bound for Valparaiso and Río de la Plata, and the framed notices on which were listed the itineraries of the Royal Mail Steam Packet line and the Lopez and Valéry Companies, together with the freight charges and ports of call of the Atlantic mail boats.
 Then, when he was tired of consulting these guides, he could rest his eyes by looking at the chronometers and compasses, the sextants and dividers, the binoculars and maps scattered over a table on which rested a single book, bound in sealskin, The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym, specially printed for him on laid paper of pure linen with a seagull watermark, each sheet of which was selected by hand.
 Finally, he could take in his fishing rods, some nets browned with tannic acid, a few rolls of russet sailcloth, and a tiny anchor made out of cork, painted black, all thrown in a heap, near the door that communicated with the kitchen via a passage lined with wadding, which absorbed, like the corridor that connected the dining room to his study, every odour and every sound.
 In this way he could quickly, almost instantaneously, procure, without moving a muscle, the sensations of a long sea voyage, and since, in truth, the pleasure of travelling only exists in retrospect and almost never in the present, at the very moment it’s being experienced, he could savour
Note: vr


 It’s all down to knowing how to do it, knowing how to concentrate your mind on a single point, knowing how to abstract yourself sufficiently to bring about the hallucination and therefore substitute the dream of reality for reality itself.


whose figure and whose form is more dazzling, more splendid than that of those two locomotives adopted by the Northern railway line?
 ‘One, the Crampton, is an adorable blonde with a shrill voice, her long delicate body imprisoned in a glittering corset of copper, as supple and sinewy as a stretching cat, a showy, gilded blonde whose extraordinary grace is frightening, when, stiffening her muscles of steel, beginning to sweat on her warm flanks, she sets in shuddering motion the immense rosette of her slender wheels and springs forward, eagerly, across hill and dale!
 ‘The other, the Engerth, is a dark and monumental brunette with a deep husky cry, her brawny loins constrained by a cast-iron girdle, a monstrous beast with a dishevelled mane of black smoke, and six low, coupled wheels, what a crushing force she has when, making the earth tremble, she slowly, ponderously, pulls the heavy tail of her goods-wagons!
 ‘Certainly there’s nothing to match such delicate slenderness and terrifying force in the dainty beauty of the blonde and the majestic beauty of the brunette; one can surely say that man, in his own way, has done as well as the God in which he believes.’


dominated in the distance by other batteries and other fortifications whose high embankments seemed, by the light of the moon, to be painted in silvery gouache against a darkening sky.


During the final few months of his stay in Paris, weary of everything, worn down by hypochondria and crushed by melancholy, he had arrived at such a state of nervous sensibility that the sight of an unpleasant object or person etched itself so deeply on his brain it took several days even to begin to efface the impression, and the touch of a human body brushing against him in the street had been one of the most excruciating tortures.
 He positively suffered at the sight of certain physiognomies, seeing the kindly or ill-tempered expressions of some faces almost as an insult, feeling an urge to slap this gentleman who walked along, eyes closed, with such a learned air, or that one who swayed from side to side smiling at his reflection in the windows; not to mention the one who seemed to be engaging in a whole world of thought, all the while devouring, with furrowed brow, rambling editorials and scraps of gossip in his newspaper.
 He detected a stupidity so inveterate, such a detestation for the ideas so dear to him, such a scorn for literature, for art, for everything that he adored, so deep-rooted and anchored in the narrow minds of these merchants, exclusively preoccupied with swindling and money-making and accessible only to that base distraction of mediocre minds, politics, that he returned home in a rage and locked himself up with his 

The author he really loved, and who caused him to leave aside forever his reading of Lucan’s resounding addresses, was Petronius.
 This latter was a shrewd observer, a discerning analyst, a marvellous painter; calmly, without prejudice, without hate, he described the daily life of Rome, recounted in the short, lively chapters of the Satyricon the manners and morals of his age.


Christian era, skipped over the orator Fronto, with his antiquated expressions badly put together and badly recalled; stepped over the Attic Nights of Aulus Gellius, his friend and disciple, a shrewd, prying mind, but a writer bogged down in a glutinous style; and halted in front of Apuleius, of whose work he owned a first edition folio printed in Rome in 1469.
 This African delighted him; the Latin language reached its high-water mark in his Metamorphoses; it stirred up the silt, the various waters rushing in from every province, and mixed and mingled everything into a bizarre, exotic, almost new tone; new mannerisms and characteristics of Latin society found themselves moulded into neologisms created for the conversational needs of a small corner of Roman Africa; what’s more, the joviality of an evidently corpulent man, his southern exuberance,

Unfortunately, under artificial light its cool flames no longer sparkle; its blue water retreats into itself, seems to fall asleep and only wakes with a glimmer at the break of day.
Note: Safir

He closed the window; this sudden shift with no transition from torrid heat to the frosts of mid-winter dazed him; he curled up close to the fire and the idea came to him to drink a liqueur to warm himself up.
 He went into the dining room where, built into one of the bulkheads, there was a cupboard containing a series of little barrels, ranged side by side on tiny sandalwood stands, their bellies pierced lower down by silver taps.

He hurried out of his house and, recalling the name of a mechanic who called himself a dentist of the people and who lived down near the quays, he rushed through the streets biting his handkerchief and holding back his tears.


perhaps he had remembered those rites of ancient Egypt, those sepulchral embalming ceremonies, when alchemists and priests would lay out the corpse of a dead queen on a bench of jasper, pull her brain out through the nasal cavities with curved needles and her intestines


 He had had the drawing room wallpapered in bright red, and on all the partitions in the room hung prints in ebony frames by Jan Luyken, an old Dutch engraver who was almost unknown in France.
 Of this fantastic and lugubrious, forceful and wild artist, he possessed a series of his Religious Persecutions, appalling engravings containing all the tortures that the madness of religion could devise, engravings which screamed out with the spectacle of human suffering, of bodies roasting on burning coals, of craniums scalped with sabres, trepanned with nails and hacked with saws, of intestines unfurled from stomachs and wound onto spools, of fingernails slowly torn out with pincers, of eyeballs gouged and eyelids sewn open with needles, of arms dislocated or meticulously broken, of bones stripped of flesh, slowly scraped with steel 

Alone among these young men, des Esseintes encouraged his friend’s resolution as soon as he heard that his fiancée wished to live on the corner of one of the new boulevards, in one of those modern apartments shaped like a rotunda.


: Do unto others what you wouldn’t want them to do unto you. Follow that maxim and you’ll go far. 

He was now incapable of understanding a word of the volumes he consulted; his very eyes would read no more – it seemed to him that his mind, saturated with literature and art, refused to absorb any more.
 He was living off himself, feeding on his own being like a hibernating animal that nestles in its hole all winter: solitude had acted on his brain like an opiate. After first making him tense and on edge, it then brought on a torpor haunted by confused daydreams; it destroyed his plans, broke his will and ushered in a procession of dreams to which he submitted, passively, without even trying to escape them.
 The chaotic mass of readings and meditations on art that he had accumulated since his isolation, like a dam constructed in order to stop the flow of old memories, had been suddenly swept away and a flood-tide unleashed, submerging the present and the future, drowning
Note: Corona

 everything beneath the waters of the past, filling his mind with an immense expanse of sadness on which floated, like ridiculous bits of wreckage, the uneventful episodes and absurd trifles of his existence.
 The book he was holding in his hand fell to his knees; his mind gave way and he watched, full of fear and loathing, the years of his dead life file past; they swirled and streamed around the recollection of Madame Laure and Auguste, embedded in the fluctuating waves, like a stake driven firmly into the ground, like a clear-cut fact. What a period that had been! It was a time of society soirées, of horse-racing and card games, of love affairs ordered in advance and served up punctually, at the stroke of midnight, in his pink boudoir. He remembered faces, expressions, pointless remarks which haunted him with the tenacity of a vulgar tune you can’t help but hum, but which finally fades away all of a sudden without you being aware of it.


once he’d left college, his scepticism had grown; his encounters with the intolerant and narrow-minded world of the Legitimists, his conversations with unintelligent church wardens and uncouth priests, whose blunders had torn aside the veil so cleverly woven by the Jesuits, had further strengthened his spirit of independence and increased his distrust in any faith whatsoever.
 He considered himself, in short, free from every tie, every constraint; he had simply preserved, contrary to those men educated in the lycées or lay boarding schools, an excellent memory of his college and his masters, and, now that he thought about it, ended up asking himself if the seeds that had hitherto fallen on barren ground weren’t at last beginning to sprout.
 Indeed, for several days past, he had been in an indescribable state of mind. For a brief instant he would believe, would turn instinctively towards religion, then at the slightest approach of reason his attraction to the faith evaporated; but he remained, in spite of everything, deeply troubled.

; he knew, beyond a doubt, that the moment Lacordaire speaks of, that moment of grace ‘when the final ray of light penetrates the soul and draws to a common centre the truths that lie scattered within,’ would never come to him;

These afflictions had slowly disappeared, thanks to a calmer, more regulated life; now, they were imposing themselves again, in a different form, wandering over his whole body; the pains left his skull and headed for his hard, swollen stomach, and for his intestines, pierced as if by a hot poker in urgent but futile strainings; then a dry, racking, nervous cough, beginning just as he awoke and always lasting the same number of minutes, choked him in his bed; finally he lost his appetite, the dry fires of heartburn, hot and gaseous, ran around his stomach, he was bloated, stifled, and after each attempt at a meal could no longer endure buttoned trousers or a tight waistcoat.
 He gave up alcohol, coffee and tea, lived on a milk diet, had recourse to ablutions of cold water, stuffed himself with asafoetida, valerian and 

They took down from another cart a new batch of monsters: Echinopsis, its vile pink flowers emerging like amputated stumps from cotton-wool compresses; Nidularium, its sabre blades opening to reveal its flayed and gaping fundament; Tillandsia lindeni, trailing jagged scrapers the colour of wine must; Cypripedium, with its complicated, incoherent contours, as if thought up by a mad inventor. In form they looked like a sabot or a little bag, on top of which curled a human tongue, its tendons taut, like those you see sketched in the pages of works dealing with diseases of the throat and mouth; two little wings of a red jujube colour, which appeared to have been borrowed from a child’s windmill, completed this baroque assemblage of the underside of a tongue the colour of slate and wine lees, and a glossy pouch the lining of which oozed a viscous glue.


Once he was alone, he stared at this tide of plants which surged across his hall; they were all mixed up, crossing their swords, their daggers and their lances with one another, forming an outline of a pile of green weapons above which floated flowers of a harsh, dazzling colour, like barbarian pennants.


Then his blood froze and he was rooted to the spot in horror. That ambiguous, sexless face was green, and violet eyelids opened to reveal terrible eyes of a cold and limpid blue; its mouth was ringed with sores; incredibly thin arms, the arms of a skeleton bare to the elbows, issued from ragged sleeves, trembling with fever, and fleshless thighs shivered in long boots that were too large.
 Its ghastly gaze was fixed on des Esseintes, penetrating him, freezing him to the very marrow; even more panicked than he was, the bulldog-woman clung to him and howled blue murder, her head thrown back on her taut 

pierrots

There it was, behind the round skylight in the corridor; more dead than alive, des Esseintes turned round and through the round window saw its pricked-up ears, its yellow teeth and its nostrils breathing out two jets of steam that smelt of carbolic acid.


During the course of this singular malady, which ravages families whose bloodline is at an end, periods of crisis gave way to sudden bouts of calm; without being able to explain why des Esseintes woke up one fine morning fit and healthy; no racking cough, no more wedges being driven into the back of his neck with hammer blows, but rather an ineffable sensation of well-being, a lightness of mind in which thoughts clarified and, from being opaque and turbid, became fluid and iridescent, like delicately tinted soap bubbles.


He had for many years been skilled in the science of perfume; he believed that the sense of smell could experience pleasures equal to those of hearing and sight, each sense being capable, by dint of a natural disposition or expert cultivation, of perceiving new impressions, of intensifying them, of coordinating them and composing them into that whole which constitutes a work of art; and that, in short, it was no more abnormal that an art such as the ability to analyse odours should exist than any other, such as that of picking out sound waves or of catching diversely coloured rays of light on the retina of the eye; only just as no one without an intuitive ability expressly developed by study could distinguish a painting by an old master from a daub, or a melody by Beethoven from one by Clapisson, no more could anyone, without prior instruction, at first help confusing a bouquet created by a real artist with a potpourri fabricated by some industrial manufacturer to be sold in grocery shops and cheap bazaars.
 In this art of perfume one branch had more than all others captivated him, that of exact 
Note: Parftm copy

In fact, perfumes are almost never produced from the flowers whose names they bear; the artist who dared to borrow only natural elements would produce nothing but a bastard work with neither authenticity nor style, seeing as the essence obtained by the distillation of flowers offers only a very distant and very imprecise analogy to the actual aroma of the living flower, as it disperses its effusions in the open air.
 Consequently, with the exception of the inimitable jasmine, which admits of no fakes or counterfeits, which even spurns any approximation, all flowers can be exactly represented by a combination of alcohols and spirits, stealing the very personality of its model and adding that certain something, that added nuance, that heady bouquet, that unique touch which qualifies it as a work of art.
 To sum up, in perfumery the artist completes the aroma initially furnished by nature, shaping and setting the scent in the same way a jeweller brings out the ‘water’ of a precious stone and thereby gives it value.
Note: Parfym forts

To do this he had first of all to master its grammar, to understand the syntax of odours, to absorb the rules that regulate them and, once he was familiar with this dialect, to compare the works of the masters, Atkinson, Lubin, Chardin, Violet, Legrand and Piesse, to analyse the construction of their sentences, to weigh the proportion of their words and the arrangement of their periods.


Its history followed, step by step, that of our language. The Louis XIII style of perfumery, composed of elements dear to the period – iris powder, musk, civet and myrtle water, already known under the name ‘Angel Water’ – was just about sufficient to express the somewhat rakish charms, the slightly crude tones of the time, which certain sonnets of Saint-Amant have conserved for us. Later, with myrrh and frankincense, potent and austere mystical fragrances, it was almost possible to represent the pompous manner of le Grand Siècle and the superfluous artifices of its oratorical art, the expansive, buttressed and balanced style of Bossuet and the masters of the pulpit; later still, the blasé, knowing graces of French society under Louis XV more easily found their interpretation in frangipani and maréchale hair powder, which in a way summed up that epoch; then, after the boredom and apathy of the First Empire, which used eau-de-Cologne and rosemary water to excess, perfumery hurled itself, in the wake of Victor Hugo and Gautier, towards the lands of the East; it created its own Les Orientales, little bouquets bursting with spices, discovered new tonalities and as yet unattempted antitheses, sifting and selecting antique nuances which it elaborated,

refined and combined; and in the end, it resolutely rejected the self-willed decrepitude to which it had been reduced by Malherbe, Boileau, Andrieux and Baour-Lormian, those vile distillers of their own poems.
 But this new language hadn’t remained stationery since the period of the 1830s. It had continued to evolve and, modelling itself on the progress of the nineteenth century, had advanced in parallel with the other arts: it, too, had submitted to the desires of amateurs and artists, taking up Chinese and Japanese art forms, devising sweet-smelling sketchbooks, imitating bouquets of Tateoka flowers, eliciting the odour of Rondeletia from a blend of lavender and clove; the peculiar aroma of Chinese ink from the marriage of patchouli and camphor; the aroma of the Japanese raisintree by compounds of citron, clove and neroli.
 Des Esseintes studied and analysed the essence of these

Like Balzac who was obsessed by a pressing need to blacken a number of sheets of paper in order to get himself in the mood,

pieces by Baudelaire, such as L’Irréparable and Le Balcon, where the last of the five lines that comprise the verse is an echo of the first,

Here, a famille verte porcelain pot contained Schnouda, that marvellous white cream which, when applied to the cheeks, turns to a tender pink under the influence of the air and then to a rosiness so lifelike that it produces the truly realistic illusion of blushing skin; there, lacquer boxes inlaid with mother-of-pearl encased in Japanese gold and Athenian green gold the colour of a blister-beetle’s wing, golds and greens that transform themselves into a deep purple when you wet them; next to pots filled with filbert paste, harem serkis, emulsions of Kashmir-lily, lotions of strawberry and elderflower for the complexion, and alongside tiny bottles filled with China ink and solutions of rosewater for the eyes, instruments made of ivory, mother-of-pearl, steel, and silver were strewn about – tweezers, scissors, skin scrapers, powderpuffs, hair crimpers, shaving brushes, back scratchers, beauty spots and nail files, as well as alfalfa toothbrushes for the gums.


Yes, the season of the great rains is come; behold the spewing of gutter-pipes singing under the pavements and the horse manure marinating in puddles, 



 judge by the few portraits preserved at the Château de Lourps, the family of the Floressas des Esseintes had, in days of old, been composed of muscle-bound troopers and grim-faced mercenaries. Squeezed tightly into old frames that barely contained their broad shoulders, they alarmed visitors with their staring eyes, their yataghan moustaches, and their chests, the huge bulges of which were crammed into the enormous shells of their cuirasses.



 ‘It’s true,’ des Esseintes continued, returning to the starting point of his argument, ‘it’s true that for the most part nature is, by herself, incapable of begetting such perverse and unhealthy species; she furnishes the raw material, the seed and the earth, the nurturing womb and the elements of the plant, which man then raises, moulds, paints and sculpts according to his fancy.
 ‘Stubborn, chaotic and limited though she is, nature has at last been subdued and her master has successfully managed to alter the minerals of the earth through chemical reactions, to utilise carefully matured combinations and slowly prepared cross-fertilizations, to make use of skilful cuttings and methodical graftings, so now he makes her sprout different coloured flowers on the same stem, invents new tones for her, modifies at will the age-old form of her plants, he finishes off her rough outlines, completes her sketches, marks them with his stamp, imprints them with his own artistic hallmark.
 ‘It goes without saying,’ he added, summing up his thoughts, ‘that in a few years man can bring about a choice that indolent nature would take centuries to produce; certainly as things stand at the moment horticulturists are the only true artists.’
 He was a little tired and felt stifled by the atmosphere of all these confined plants; the shopping trips he had made over the last few days had exhausted him; the transition from fresh air to the warmth of his room, from the stillness of a reclusive life to the bustle of an unfettered existence had been too sudden; he left the vestibule and stretched out on his bed; but, absorbed by a single subject, as if wound up by a spring, 

And yet here I am warming myself in front of a large fire, while a basket of blooming flowers on the table gives off an aroma of benzoin, geranium and vetiver grass that fills the room. In the middle of November, at Pantin, in the Rue de Paris, Spring persists and here, in my solitude, I laugh at those faint-hearted families who, to avoid the approach of the cold weather, escape on the first steamer heading towards Antibes or Cannes.
 ‘It has to be said that inclement nature has nothing to do with this extraordinary phenomenon: it’s to man’s industry alone that this artificial season at Pantin is indebted.
 ‘In fact these flowers are made of taffeta mounted on binding wire, and the smell of Springtime that seeps through the window joints is given off by the neighbouring factories, the perfumeries of Pinaud and Saint James.
 ‘For craftsmen worn out by hard labour in the workshop, for lowly clerks – all too often also fathers – this illusion of a small breath of 

An indistinct smell of tincture of Tolu, balsam of Peru and saffron, held together by a few drops of amber and musk, 

The billows of ink had evaporated and dissipated, the rough edges of the clouds had melted away, and the sky was uniformly flat as if covered with a brackish film. Little by little, this film seemed to descend and a watery haze enveloped the countryside; the rain no longer poured down in cataracts as it had the day before, but fell without respite, thin, sharp and penetrating, saturating paths and swamping roads, joining heaven and earth with its innumerable threads; the light grew murky; a livid daylight illuminated the village, now transformed into a lake of mud stippled by needles of rain that pricked the filthy water of the puddles with drops of quicksilver; amid the desolation of nature all colour had faded, leaving only the roofs to glisten above the dull tones of the walls.


He was alone in his compartment; a blurred, dirty countryside, seen as if through an aquarium filled with murky water, receded at full speed behind the convoy of rain-lashed railway carriages. Immersed in his thoughts, des Esseintes closed his eyes.


The rain came in diagonally through the cab windows; des Esseintes had to pull up the panes which were streaked with channels of running water, while gobbets of mud sprayed up like fireworks on every side. To the monotonous sound of sacks of peas being shaken over his head as the heavy showers pattered against the trunks on the roof of the cab, des Esseintes daydreamed about his voyage; this dreadful weather was like a first instalment of England, paid in advance in Paris, a rain-soaked London, colossal, immense, stinking of iron foundries and soot, smoking

Certainly, Haarlem and Amsterdam had captivated him; the unwashed masses, seen in their proper rustic surroundings, really resembled those painted by van 

He’d acted in a similar way in sourcing his papers: tired of silver-glazed Chine, nacreous and gilt Japon, white Whatman, unbleached Hollande, buff-coloured Turkey and Seychall Mill, and disgusted, too, by mechanically produced papers, he decided one fine day to order special handmade laid papers from the old factories at Vire, where they still used the pestles formerly employed to grind 

Thus he had had the works of Baudelaire printed with the marvellous episcopal typeface used by the old firm of Le Clerc,

studying the human creature who is apt to become embittered and skilled in self-deception, who compels his thoughts to cheat each other in order to suffer more keenly, spoiling in advance, thanks to his power of analysis and observation, all possible future joys.


drugs are invoked to help numb the suffering and to check boredom. 

Le Dîner d’un athée.


 La Tentation de saint Antoine and Salammbô

Villiers appropriated its fastidious and terrifying premise.
 It was the same with ‘L’Intersigne’, which was later added to the Contes cruels, a collection of indisputable talent which also included ‘Véra

Swift. A series of fables, Les Demoiselles de Bienfilâtre, L’Affichage céleste, La Machine à gloire, and Le Plus beau dîner du monde, revealed a sarcastic spirit that was singularly inventive and bitter. All the filth of contemporary utilitarian ideas, all the money-grabbing ignominy of the age was glorified in these stories whose poignant irony enraptured des Esseintes.

Cold water frozen into your frame by ennui,
 How many times, and for hours on end, grieved
 By dreams and searching my memories
 Like leaves beneath your glass’s icy depths
 Have I seen myself in you like a distant shadow!
 But oh the horror of those nights when in your cruel waters
 I saw my scattered dreams in all their 

But above all he’d felt ineffable pleasure when listening to plainsong, which the organist had kept up despite new fashions in music.
 That form, now considered to be an old-fashioned Gothic form of Christian liturgy, an archeological curiosity, a relic of ancient times, was the true voice of the early Church, the soul of the Middle Ages; it was the eternal prayer, sung and modulated according to the transports of the soul, an everlasting hymn offered up over the centuries to the Most High.


For years now he’d obstinately refused to take part in these pious extravagances, falling back on his childhood memories, regretting even having heard some of the Te Deums of the great masters, because he could remember that admirable Te Deum sung in plainsong, that hymn so simple and so awe-inspiring, composed by some saint or other, a Saint Ambrose or a Saint Hilary, who, lacking the complicated resources of an orchestra and lacking the musical techniques of modern 

Schubert’s Lieder that had lifted him up, taken him out of himself and then left him prostrated, as if after a discharge of nervous fluid, after a mystical debauch of the soul.


however intuitive they might be, doctors knew nothing about neurosis, were ignorant even of its very causes. Like all the others, this one would prescribe the invariable zinc oxide and quinine, potassium bromide and valerian. ‘But

The less scrupulous, less dull-witted among them threw aside all sense of shame; they dabbled in shady deals, sifted through the muddy waters of business, were brought before the court of assizes like common swindlers, where they served to elevate the tone of human justice which, not always able to stop itself from being biased, ended up appointing them as prison librarians.


In the Dominican section of his library didn’t he have a book by a doctor of theology, the Reverend Father Rouard de Card, a preaching friar who had categorically proved, in a pamphlet entitled On the Adulteration of Sacramental Substances, that the majority of masses were invalid, by reason of the fact that the ingredients used in religious services had been debased by their manufacturers?
 Over the years, holy oils had been adulterated with chicken fat; candle wax with calcinated bones; incense with cheap resin and old benzoin. But what was worse was that the substances indispensable to the holy sacrifice, the two substances without which no oblation is possible, had also been debased: the wine, by numerous dilutions and by illicit additions of Pernambuco, elderberry, alcohol, alum, salicylic acid and lead oxide; the bread – the bread of the 

that ought to be kneaded with the finest wheat flour – by white haricot bean flour, potash and pipe clay!
 But now they had gone even further; they had dared to eliminate wheat entirely and shameless wholesalers were making almost all their hosts out of potato starch.
 Now God refused to manifest Himself in potato starch. It was an undeniable and certain fact; in the second volume of his treatise on moral theology, his Eminence Cardinal Gousset had dwelt at length on this question of fraud practised from the divine point of view, and, according to the incontestable authority of this expert, one could not consecrate bread made out of oat, buckwheat or barley flour, and if things were a little more doubtful in the case of rye-bread, there could be no argument, no debate, when it came to potato starch which, according to the ecclesiastical expression, ‘was not, under any circumstances, a matter fit for sacramental purposes’.
 Because potato starch was so easy to work with and the unleavened wafers made with it looked so attractive, this outrageous deception had become so widespread that 

Lord, take pity on the Christian who doubts, on the sceptic who wants to believe, on the galley slave of life who sets sail alone in the night, under a sky no longer lit by the consoling beacons of the ancient hope!’


This ideal was, of its type, realized in a masterpiece which, far more than L’Assommoir, has been the paragon of Naturalism, Gustave Flaubert’s L’Éducation Sentimentale. This book was for all of us associated with the Soirées de Médan a veritable bible; but it brought little grist to our mill. It was complete, something not to be attempted again even by Flaubert himself; consequently we found ourselves reduced in those days to meandering, to prowling around and about down paths that had been more or less thoroughly explored.


The strange thing was that, without being aware of it at the beginning, I was led by the very nature of my work to study the Church under a number of aspects. It was, in fact, impossible to go back to the only really characteristic era humanity has ever known, to the Middle Ages, without realizing that the Church embraced everything, that art existed only in her and through her. Not having faith, I looked upon the Church with some suspicion, surprised at her greatness and her glory, asking myself how a religion which seemed to me only made for children had been able to suggest such marvellous works.
 I prowled around her a little in a groping way, guessing more than I saw, reconstructing a whole for myself with the fragments I recovered in museums and old books. And today, after longer and more trustworthy investigations, when I browse through the pages of Against Nature that deal with Catholicism and religious art, I notice that the miniature panorama I sketched on leaves of a notepad is 

I never dreamt that from Schopenhauer, whom I admired beyond reason, to Ecclesiastes and the Book of Job was but a step. The premises of Pessimism are identical; only when it comes to action does the philosopher slip away. I liked his ideas on the horror of life, on the stupidity of the world, on the harshness of fate; I like them just as well in the holy books; but Schopenhauer’s observations end in nothing; he leaves you, so to speak, in the lurch; his aphorisms, in fact, are nothing but a herbarium of desiccated lamentations; the Church, for her part, explains origins and causes, points out conclusions, offers remedies; she is not satisfied with giving you a spiritual consultation, she treats you and cures you, while the German quack, after clearly showing you that the complaint you suffer from is incurable, turns his back on you with a 

From a distance, these similarities and dissimilarities stand out clearly, but at that period if I saw them at all I paid no heed; the need to come to a conclusion didn’t appeal to me; the road laid down by Schopenhauer was passable and offered varied views, I walked along contentedly, without desiring to know where it ended up. In those days I had no real perspicuity as to debts to be paid, no apprehension of how things would end; the mysteries of the catechism seemed to me to be childish; like all Catholics, indeed, I was entirely ignorant of my religion; I failed to realise that everything is a mystery, that we live only in mystery, that if chance existed it would be still more mysterious than Providence. I couldn’t admit that suffering could be inflicted by a God, I imagined that Pessimism could be the consoler of elevated souls. What stupidity! There was no empirical evidence, no ‘human document’, to use a phrase dear to Naturalism, to support it. Never has Pessimism consoled either the sick of body or the afflicted of soul.
 I smile, now, after so many years, when I re-read the pages in which these theories, so resolutely false, are 

But what strikes me most in this reading is this: all the novels I’ve written since Against Nature are contained in embryo in that book. Its successive chapters are in effect simply the foundations of the books that followed.
 The chapter on the Latin literature of the Decadent period I have, if not developed, at any rate probed deeper into, when treating the liturgy in En route and L’Oblat. I could reprint it today without changing anything, except for Saint Ambrosius, whose watery prose and turgid rhetoric I still dislike; he still seems to me what I called him then, a ‘boring Christian Cicero’. But, by contrast, as a poet he is charming, and his hymns and those of his school that figure in the Breviary are among the finest the Church has preserved; I will add that the admittedly rather specialised literature of the hymnal might well have found a place in the reserved compartment of this chapter.
 At the present moment I’m no more enamoured of the classical Latin of Virgil and ‘Chick-pea’ Cicero than I was in 1884; as in the days of Against Nature I prefer the language of the Vulgate to that of the Augustan age, or even to that of the Decadent period, though it is more interesting with its gamey flavour and its marbled tints like over-high 

Without believing, as did an old writer of the sixteenth century, Estienne de Clave, that precious stones propagate themselves like human beings, with a seed disseminated in the womb of the earth,

They have been seen in this way from remotest antiquity and the tropology of gems is one branch of that Christian symbolism which has been so completely forgotten about by priests and laymen in our own day, and which I have tried to reconstruct in its broad outlines in my book on the basilica of Chartres.


 have since written the counterpart to this botanical study in La Cathédrale, in reference to that liturgical horticulture which has given rise to such curious pages in the works of St. Hildegard, St. Melito and St. Eucherius.


He might also have experimented with the aromas of the Church, incense, myrrh and that strange Thymiama mentioned in the Bible and which is still cited in books of ritual as being required to be burned, together with incense, under the mouths of church bells when they are baptised, after the bishop has washed them with holy water and made the sign of the cross on them with the Holy Chrism and the unction of the sick; but this fragrance seems forgotten even by the Church, and I think that a priest would be highly astonished if you asked him for Thymiama.
 Yet the recipe is given in Exodus. Thymiama was compounded of styrax, galbanum, incense and onycha, and this last substance would seem to be nothing other than the operculum of a certain shellfish belonging to the ‘purple’ variety, which are dredged up in the Indian deltas.
 Now it is difficult, not to say impossible, given the insufficient description of this shellfish and its place of origin, to prepare an authentic Thymiama; and that is a pity, because if it had been otherwise this lost 

 for the chapters on contemporary secular and religious literature, they still, in my opinion, like that on Latin literature, remain true. The chapter devoted to secular writing has helped to bring to attention several poets little known to the public of the day: Corbière, Mallarmé, Verlaine. I have nothing to retract from what I wrote nineteen years ago; I have retained my admiration for these authors, and that which I professed for Verlaine has even increased. Arthur Rimbaud and Jules Laforgue would have deserved to figure in des Esseintes’ florilegium, but they hadn’t yet published anything at that period and it wasn’t until long after that their works appeared.

d’Aurevilly in extolling the work of this man who was so imperfect, but so interesting, and Against Nature has, I think, helped in the small success that his best book, L’Homme, has won since his death.


Finally, if ever a chapter could be considered the starting-point for other books, it is surely that on plainsong, which I afterwards developed in all my books, in En route and especially in L’Oblat.


God was digging to lay his cables, and he only worked in the darkness of the soul, in the night. Nothing was visible; it wasn’t until years afterwards that the spark began to run along the wires. Then I could feel my soul being moved by these shocks; 

After such a book, it only remains for the author to choose between the muzzle of a pistol and the foot of the cross.’
 The choice is made.
 
 J.-K. Huysmans


From black-bordered plates they had eaten turtle soup, Russian rye bread, ripe olives from Turkey, caviar, salted mullet roes, smoked black pudding from Frankfurt, game birds covered in sauces the colour of liquorice and boot polish, truffle gravy, chocolate-flavoured cream, plum-puddings, brugnon musqué peaches, fruit preserves in grape juice, mulberries and black-heart cherries; from dark glasses they had drunk wines from Limagne and Roussillon, from Tenedos, Valdepeñas and Oporto; and after coffee and walnut brandy, they had savoured kvass, porter and 


[j]ustice doesn’t exist and freedom is an illusion” and the trilogy ends with her being “used up psychologically and emotionally, thoroughly disillusioned” (Cusey

The Hunger Games is a reality television program. An Extreme one, but that’s what it is.”
  

   
     —Suzanne Collins, “Q & A with Hunger Games Author Suzanne Collins” (Hudson)


One night, I was lying in bed, and I was channel surfing between reality TV programs and actual war coverage. On one channel, there’s a group of young people competing for I don’t even know; and on the next, there’s a group of young people fighting in an actual war. I was really tired, and the lines between these stories started to blur in a very unsettling way. That’s the moment when Katniss’s story came to me [Margolis 2008].


concern with the ways in which popular programming 

desensitizes people to violence and conflict. She finds reality television particularly “disturbing” since it often involves “people being humiliated, or brought to tears, or suffering physically” (Hudson). The problem with this, she indicates, is that when audiences “see real tragedy playing out on, say, the news, it doesn’t have the impact it should.

she uses Katniss Everdeen’s first-hand account of her experiences to suggest that, in addition to providing entertainment, reality programs act as “socializing agents,” to borrow April Roth’s terms, playing an essential role in maintaining “the dominant ideology” (35). Though largely unscripted, such programs are constructed, edited, and in some cases digitally altered so as to provide compelling narratives that both affirm prevailing beliefs and naturalize them by embedding them in contexts that represent themselves as real. As Christopher Wright observes, it is the latter that makes these programs such effective ideological agents: reality shows are fictions that present themselves as fact 

Whereas Survivor’s primary ideological function is to affirm capitalism, celebrating the profit motive, the Hunger Games’ function is to affirm the Capitol’s absolute dominance over the districts through its control of resources. As its very name suggests, the Hunger Games center on scarcity, every resource in the arena being carefully managed by the Gamemakers, who represent the Capitol itself. Rather than simply set up certain rules and parameters and let the Games play themselves out, the Gamemakers manage everything from food and water to temperature on an ongoing basis, demonstrating that their power is absolute.

The Gamemakers’ absolute control over resources in the arena is presumably meant to mirror the Capitol’s control over the resources of Panem,

Capitol is able to convey the idea that a widespread rebellion could not possibly be sustained, and that uprisings would result in further suffering rather than social change.

reality television in the United States is largely determined by market forces, the ideological content of the Hunger Games is determined by a centralized government, and therefore the Games serve as a form of state propaganda.

having the mayors of each district read an official history of Panem, which includes an account of an earlier rebellion against the Capitol and explains that the Games exist as a reminder of the Capitol’s power. As Katniss observes, “Whatever words they use, the real message is clear: ‘Look how we take your children and sacrifice them and there’s nothing you can do. If you lift a finger, we will destroy every last one of you’” (Hunger Games 16). The

The ways in which Collins represents fashion-themed reality programming in the Hunger Games trilogy is also worth considering in detail since Collins addresses the fashion industry in all three novels, ultimately suggesting that it has a powerful influence on the way people think and act. Indeed, the pre-game programming that documents Katniss’s transformation into a sexual object can itself be regarded as commentary on the ideological implications of programs such as Extreme Makeover, Project Runway, and America’s Top Model. By exploring the objectification process through the consciousness of Katniss as she is prepared for the Games by Cinna and his 

Gradually Katniss comes to accept her transformation and even appreciate the fact that being an object of desire affords certain benefits, commenting, “The Hunger Games aren’t supposed to be a beauty contest, but the best-looking tributes always seem to pull more sponsors” (58). She manages to retain her sense of self despite her objectification, however, at least until she sees her own reflection just before her interview with Caesar Flickerman: “The creature standing before me in the full-length mirror has come from another world. Where skin shimmers and eyes flash and apparently they make their clothes from jewels. Because my dress, oh, my dress is entirely covered in reflective precious gems ... I am not pretty. I am not beautiful. I am as radiant as the sun” (Hunger Games 119–20).

. Upon leaving the stage, however, Katniss quickly regains her perspective, apparently realizing that in allowing herself to be objectified she has compromised herself and her values. By the time she returns to the Training Center, her giddiness has become anger, and she assaults Peeta for publicly declaring his desire for her in his interview: in her view, by making her an “object of love,” he has made her seem foolish and weak (Hunger Games 136). Even though Haymitch eventually convinces Katniss that presenting herself as a “heartbreaker” gives her the best chance of winning sponsors, going forward she no longer gets caught up in such performances, realizing that it is a just a means to an end and not part of who she really is (Hunger Games 

The challenges involved in maintaining the double-consciousness necessary to succeed in the Games become most evident in Katniss’s relationship with Peeta, a relationship that begins as a “showmance,” that is, as a romantic relationship that develops within a reality program

showmance is initially strategic: although Peeta has real feelings for Katniss, he declares his love for her in an interview that is broadcast just before the Games begin in the hopes that it will increase sponsor interest, leading to more gifts while in the arena. Katniss, who has no advance knowledge of the scheme, agrees to play along with it once Haymitch convinces her that perceptions are more important than reality in the Games since, in the end, they are just “a big show” (Hunger Games 133). Once they are in the arena, there is initially little opportunity for the two of them to develop their showmance further: indeed, Peeta seems to betray Katniss by allying himself with the Careers and helping them to hunt her down. Even then, though, Katniss tries to maintain the appearance of a romance, giving the cameras a “knowing smile” as if Peeta’s apparent betrayal is part of their plan (164). It is only after the rules of the Games are officially changed to allow for two victors that the showmance becomes central again as Katniss plays up the romance in order to obtain gifts from their sponsors. As her relationship with Peeta develops, however, Katniss has increasing difficulty in separating her performance from her real feelings. After nearly dying in an effort to get medicine desperately needed by Peeta, she begins to realize how attached she has become to him, how her need to be with him is no longer “about the sponsors” but about “

Eventually Katniss’s recognition that her showmance with Peeta has emerged as the Games’ primary narrative allows her to manipulate not only sponsors but the Gamemakers themselves (Vizzini 103). When, towards the end of the Games it is announced that the earlier rule change has been revoked and that there can only be one survivor—that either Katniss or Peeta will have to die—Katniss is able to convince the Gamemakers that she and Peeta would both rather die than survive alone. As Katniss realizes, a double suicide would subvert the ideological purpose of the Games, which is to dramatize the government’s absolute power over its citizens: in killing themselves, Katniss and Peeta would be demonstrating agency, albeit in a very limited way, something that is entirely unacceptable to the Capitol. Moreover, a double suicide would deny the Capitol a victor to parade through the districts as a living reminder of their power over life and death. Consequently, the Gamemakers capitulate and both Katniss and Peeta are declared winners, Katniss in effect defeating the Capitol at its own game.


 Games seem to have an additional function in the Capitol itself, where the decadent population has come to expect the government to provide them with entertainment, just as the citizens of ancient Rome did, according to Juvenal (89). Indeed, Collins indicates herself in an interview with her publisher that she had ancient Rome in mind:

   
     In keeping with the classical roots, I send my tributes into an updated version of the Roman gladiator games, which entails a ruthless government forcing people to fight to the death as popular entertainment. The world of Panem, particularly the Capitol, is loaded with Roman references. Panem itself comes from the expression “Panem et Circenses” which translates into “Bread and Circuses.”


citizens are so caught up in the artificial drama that plays out on television that they pay little attention to the fact that their “president” is, in fact, a dictator who attained power by murdering his rivals or that their affluence comes at the cost of great privation elsewhere.

   The Hunger Games do more than just distract its viewers in the Capitol, however; they also affirm the existing political structure by validating the idea that those on top are there because they have proven themselves most worthy, and the idea that ruthlessness is not only acceptable as a means of acquiring power but even necessary. These ideas seem to pertain not only to the government in relation to the people but, more broadly, to Capitol 

the Games reinforce the idea that those living in the Capitol are deserving of the privileges they enjoy, privileges denied to those living in the districts, and that their government’s ruthlessness in maintaining these privileges is justified.

Artificial drama, it seems, has become more important than real-life suffering, and so suffering continues, unacknowledged and unchecked by the very people who benefit from it. More than that, though, Collins suggests that programs such as Cops, Survivor, Extreme Makeover, and The Biggest Loser have a powerful ideological effect, affirming Americans’ sense that they are worthy of the privileges they enjoy and that almost any sort of action can be justified in maintaining them. Like the Hunger Games, these programs accomplish this by dehumanizing people: they stage conflicts, elicit negative behaviors, and then construct narratives around those behaviors that present them as authentic, ultimately suggesting that people get what they deserve.


incisive satire of reality television shows,” targeting tropes such the makeover and the showmance. The Hunger Games trilogy does more than just parody shows such as Survivor, Extreme Makeover, and Project Runway, however: it also offers indirect commentary on the ways in which such programming influences people’s beliefs and behaviors through its representation of the Hunger Games as an ideological agent. More than that, though, the trilogy serves as a form of media criticism, one of Collins’s primary concerns being how to make her readers, particularly children, more conscious of the way media informs their thinking. In particular, she hopes to help them differentiate between “what is real and what is not real” by exposing reality television’s political and ideological functions in her work (Hudson). By presenting a detailed account of the ways in which reality programming affects the ways in which her protagonist thinks and acts, Collins demonstrates how accepting what one sees on television at face value makes one vulnerable to manipulation and control. Ultimately Collins suggests that only way to protect oneself is by approaching things critically, by recognizing that even unscripted, reality-based programming are constructions, and that as such, they reflect the beliefs and values of their producers.


. We learn about the world in which Katniss lives only as she does, sharing her consciousness, as it were, as she sees every district of Panem for the first time through a train window.



In the present edition, the orthography used in writing Mayan words follows that established by the Guatemalan Institute of Mayan Languages, with the exception of names of archaeological sites (these have been

too long in the professional and tourist literature to be changed without confusing the reader). In this, the vowels and most of the consonants are generally pronounced as they are in Spanish, with the exceptions that follow. The consonant w is like English w. As it had in sixteenth-century Spain, x has the sound of English sh. Mayan languages make an important distinction between glottalized and non-glottalized consonants; the former are pronounced fortis, with constricted throat; in this

orthography, such consonants are followed by an apostrophe. The glottal stop (’) is also a consonant, and is similar to the way a Cockney Englishman might pronounce the tt in little.
 In Classic Mayan (the language of the inscriptions), there are two voiceless aspirates. One is h, very similar to English h, the other is j, a guttural consonant like the ch in German Bach.


It was 12 cycles, 18 k’atuns, 16 tuns, 0 winals, and 16 k’ins since the beginning of the Great Cycle. The day was 12 Kib 14 Wo, and was ruled by the seventh Lord of the Night. The moon was nine days old. Precisely 5,101 of our years and 235 days had passed since the creation of this universe, and only 23 years and 22 days yet remained until the final 
Note: Bra bombnedslag i kulturen

To those far-off Maya, writing was of divine origin: it was the gift of Itzamnaaj, the great creator divinity whom the people of Yucatán on the eve of the Conquest considered to be the first priest. Each year in the month Wo – the same month in which we found ourselves on the Neva embankment – the priests invoked him by bringing out their precious books and spreading them out on fresh boughs in the house of the local lord. Sacred pom incense was burned to the god,

Athanasius Kircher
Note: Borrglomd konstig prast

. How many vacationing tourists who visit the glorious ruins of Yucatán are aware that Mexican law forbids the teaching in schools of the Yucatec Maya tongue – the tongue of the people who built these pyramids?

How many heads of state in those countries have any “Indian” blood to speak of? And when has any Native American language been heard in the halls of the United Nations? The answer is “none” and “never.” No imperial conquest has ever been so total, or a great people so shattered.


We now know that Ch’olan is to the inscribed texts of the Classic Maya cities what Coptic was to the hieroglyphic inscriptions of ancient Egypt.



is just not possible in Mayan to use an imperfective verb (referring to actions or events in the past, present, or future that have not been completed) without sticking a date or a temporal aspect adverb in front of it. The Maya are, and have always been, very, very particular about 

t u hatz’-ah-o’on-o’ob, “they hit us” (in the past)
 t, completive aspect, transitive verb
 u-…-o’ob, “they” (Set A)
 hatz’, “to hit”
 -ah, perfective suffix
 o’on, “us” (Set B)

 And another:
 
 taan in-hatz’-ik-ech, “I am hitting you”
 taan, durative aspect
 in-, “I” (Set A)
 hatz’, “to hit”
 -ik, imperfective verb suffix
 -ech, “you” (object, Set B pronoun)


A traveler heading south on foot from the Petén would eventually encounter the incredibly rough karst terrain of the Verapaz country, with huge caverns – one of which, near the town of Chamá, was believed to be the entrance to Xibalbá, the Maya Underworld.



Mayanists, in their enthusiasm for their subject, are apt to forget that the culture they are studying was part of a more widespread pattern or way of life that is called “Mesoamerican.” Broadly defined, Mesoamerica comprises that part of Mexico and adjacent Central America which was civilized at the time of the Spanish Conquest. It includes most of central, southern, and southeastern Mexico (and en-compasses the Yucatán Peninsula), Guatemala, Belize, and the westernmost portions of Honduras and El Salvador. Within its borders, many tongues were and are spoken, including of course languages of the Mayan family, and just about every kind of environment can be found: deserts, snow-capped volcanoes, temperate valleys, tropical lowlands, mangrove swamps, etc.
 Yet within this babble of tongues and varied landscape, certain cultural traits are held in common. All of these people were farmers, cultivating corn, beans, squashes, and chili peppers; all lived in villages, towns, and cities, and traded in large and complex markets; all had books (although only the

Zapotec of Oaxaca, the Maya, and the poorly known Isthmian or “epi-Olmec” people of Veracruz had true writing). Perhaps most importantly, all had a polytheistic religion which, while not uniform everywhere, had significant elements in common, such as a sacred calendar based on a cycle of 260 days, and the belief that it was absolutely necessary to shed human blood – either one’s own or that of captives – in honor of the gods and ancestors.
 At one end of the Mesoamerican time-span stand the Aztec and their mighty empire, best known of all since their civilization was destroyed – and recorded – by the Spanish conquistadors. The language of their empire (which impinged upon, but never included the Maya) was Nahuatl, an agglutinating tongue blessedly free of the complexities which make the Mayan languages so difficult; this was the lingua franca of most of non-Maya Mesoamerica, used by traders and bureaucrats alike.


sacrificial rites involving the four directions of the universe.

Classic Maya civilization flourished for about six centuries, in Old World terms roughly from the reign of the Roman emperor Diocletian, that formidable producer of Christian martyrs, to King Alfred of Wessex, defeater of Danes. The Prophet Mohammed was contemporary with the transition from the Maya Early to Late Classic; when he fled from Mecca to Medina, marking the start of the Islamic Era, the great Maya ruler of Palenque, Pakal or “Shield,” had been on the throne for eight years.


The K’iche’ was the most powerful of these states, until smashed by that most horrible of all the conquistadors, the brutal Pedro de Alvarado. Perhaps the lasting glory of the K’iche’ is that they managed to preserve well into the colonial era (when it was written down using Spanish letters) the supreme Maya epic, known as the Popol Vuh or “Book of Counsel” – by any reckoning the greatest achievement of known native New World literature.34 As we shall see, this has proved to be the key to some of the deepest and most esoteric secrets of Classic Maya culture.


they learned nothing and they forgot nothing.

It would take a small encyclopedia, or perhaps a five-hour celluloid Hollywood epic, to do ample justice to the life and career of “Count” Jean Frédéric Maximilien Waldeck, the self-styled “first Americanist.”6 Even the feats of the beloved Baron Munchausen sometimes pale by comparison with Waldeck’s. In his cutting Boston manner, the historian William H. Prescott once confided to Mme. Fanny

He was also an accomplished pornographer, producing the illustrations for Pietro Aretino’s licentious sixteenth-century verses, I Modi (“The Love Positions”).


so indebted to his creditors that his landlord 

The two had met four years before in London, and become friends; thus, it was no surprise that when Catherwood settled in New York to practice architecture, Stephens persuaded him to accompany him to Central America. Out of this collaboration came the landmark 1841 publication, in two volumes, Incidents of Travel in Central America, Chiapas, and Yucatán; and, following a second trip to explore Yucatán, the Incidents of Travel in Yucatán of 1843.27 Every Mayanist, myself included, keeps these often reprinted masterpieces on his bookshelf in a place of honor, since they mark the very genesis of serious Maya research. I never get tired of rereading my own copies – there is always something fresh to find in Stephens’ delightful, unpretentious prose, and inspiration in Catherwood’s crisp 

Setting aside their exploration of the Guatemalan highlands (where there are no Classic period inscriptions at all), they surveyed, described, and drew the major buildings and monuments of Copán, Quiriguá, and Palenque in the southern lowlands, and Uxmal, Kabah, Sayil, and Chichén Itzá in the north – along with several sites in the Puuk area that have since received little or no archaeological attention. Stephens and Catherwood were the first since the days of the Spanish Conquest to visit the clifftop ruins of Tulum on the east coast of the Peninsula. Needless to say, all this was done under the most trying conditions, long before the age of bug repellents, antibiotics, and anti-malarial pills; our travelers clearly suffered, but never complained, and Stephens’ prose retains its equanimity throughout (unlike that of Waldeck and other more choleric explorers).




H. Rider Haggard’s great adventure story Heart of the World;36


 Making a record of this sort may have been harrowing, but getting the results of his great research safely back to London, casts and all, must have been equally daunting. At any rate, they did get there, and Maudslay employed an artist, Miss Annie Hunter, to draw, from the casts and photographs with which he furnished her, accurate lithographic plates of every monument and inscription. For Maudslay had found his publisher in the persons of his friends the biologists Frederick Du Cane Godman and Osbert Salvin. Beginning in 1889, when the first fascicle came out, Maudslay’s monumental Archaeology was to appear as an appendix to the multivolume work Biologia Centrali-Americana; the whole of his Archaeology reached its final form as one volume of text and four of 

Goodman, born in 1838, was a journalist, and he had begun his career early. Before he was twenty-three, he had become owner and editor of the Territorial Enterprise of Virginia City, in what was then Nevada Territory. This had been the site of the fabulous gold strike of 1859 known as the Comstock Lode, and Virginia City was a Wild West town par excellence: it had a hundred saloons in 1870, in a population of thirty thousand! Among students of American literature, Goodman has a certain claim to fame as the person who gave a young man named Samuel Clemens his first writing job in 1861, as a reporter on the Enterprise; in fact, Clemens first signed his name as “Mark Twain” on a humorous contribution to Goodman’s paper. Goodman became rich on his Comstock Lode investments, and moved to California, where he founded the San Franciscan (Twain was a contributor to the first number). He then bought a large raisin orchard in Fresno, California, and in the 1880s began his Maya studies.


Head variants for the Maya numbers, with equivalents in spoken Yucatec.


In his autobiography dictated in 1906, Mark Twain had these characteristically lighthearted words to say about Goodman, his onetime employer:


By the 1890s, Americans had begun to chew gum in earnest, and chicle – the basic ingredient – had to be extracted by experienced chicle-hunters from trees in the forests of the southern Maya lowlands. The chicleros, an improvident but courageous group of rascals on the whole (I used to know some), cut hundreds of trails through the Petén, uncovering dozens of heretofore unknown Maya cities.

 The world-directions as discovered by de Rosny, and the associated colors later discovered by Eduard Seler.


The natives of Yucatan are, among all the inhabitants of New Spain, especially deserving of praise for three things: First, that before the Spaniards came they made use of characters and letters, with which they wrote out their histories, their ceremonies, and the order of sacrifices to their idols, and their calendars, in books made of bark of a certain tree. These were on very long strips, a quarter or a third (of a yard) in width, doubled and folded, so that they resembled a bound book in quarto, a little larger or smaller. These letters and characters were understood only by the priests of the idols (who in that language are called Ahkins) and a few principal natives. Afterwards some of our friars learned to understand and read them, and even wrote them [my italics].35

modern Yucatec.

Maudslay by his artist Annie Hunter.








Whorf’s research led him to believe, as his literary executor John Carroll has said, that “the strange grammar of Hopi might betoken a different mode of perceiving and conceiving things on the part of a native speaker of Hopi,”22 a hypothesis that became enormously influential in intellectual circles through a series of popular articles that he wrote for the MIT Technology Review. If Whorf (and his mentor Sapir) were right, then perhaps all of us have been conditioned in our view of the world and reality by the particular grammar in which we think and speak.


cult of time 


 Some thirty-five years ago, Mérida was Mexico’s quietest backwater, a gleaming white city of largely one-story houses, with many bronzed Maya women clad in dazzling white huipils in the streets and markets; Yucatec Maya could still be heard throughout, and it had a deserved reputation as being a safe, spotlessly clean provincial capital. 



Day of the Oprichnik





The last line fades. The subversive poem disappears, melts in the dark air. The blinds are raised. Buturlin sits silently. His brown eyes are focused on Batya, who glances at us. The target of this pasquinade is as clear as day. By our eyes Batya can tell that there isn’t any doubt: the gloomy count with the diamond hedgehog carved in his ring is none other than Count Andrei Vladimirovich Urusov, His Majesty’s son-in-law, professor of jurisprudence, an active member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, honorary chair of the Mind Department, chairman of the All-Russian Equine Society, chairman of the Association to Promote Air Flight, chairman of the Society of Russian Fisticuffs, comrade of the chairman of the Eastern Treasury, owner of the Southern Port, owner of the Izmailovsky and Donskoi markets, owner of the Moscow Association of Building Contractors, owner of the Moscow Brick Factory, co-owner of the Western Railroad. And the hint about the Malachite Chamber was also obvious: this new space, located under the Kremlin Concert Hall, was built for the rest and relaxation of the Inner Circle and their retinue. It’s new, therefore fashionable. For that matter, the construction of the Malachite Chamber elicited quite a few subversive questions. Yes, yes, there were opponents…

His Majesty’s fury is terrifying. And even more terrifying because our sire never raises his voice.




The Russian Riviera dares—in a brazen, impudent tone—to criticize His Majesty’s order to close the Third Western Pipeline for twenty-four hours. How much anger those European gentlemen have accumulated! For decades they have sucked our gas without thinking of the hardship it brought to our hardworking people. What astonishing news they report! Oh dear, it’s cold in Nice again! Gentlemen, you’ll have to get used to eating cold foie gras at least a couple of times a week. Bon appétit! China turned out to be smarter than you…


minute of Russian poetry.” A slightly nervous young man declaims:


 “The fields flow with fog,
 Bark and birch are injured,
 The ground’s a bare black bog,
 Spring’s not icumen in.
 The birch bark’s been bled
 With a jagged axe blade,
 Down, down the sap runs,
 Calling to matins.”

 One of the new poets. Not bad, it creates a certain mood…One thing I don’t get, though: how does birch sap call to matins? Church bells should call to matins. Up ahead I notice a traffic cop in a fluorescent coat. I call him on the government line:
 “Officer! Clear the road for me!”


So, then,” he continues. “His Majesty’s daughter has filed for divorce. I don’t think the patriarch will divorce them. But the Moscow Metropolitan could divorce them.”
 He could. We understand. He very likely would. Just like that! If that happened, Urusov would be completely naked. How wisely His Majesty conducts internal politics; oh, how wisely! If you look at it from the family point of view, what does that pasquinade mean for him? Underground rebels write all sorts of things…After all, no matter what you say, it’s his son-in-law, the spouse of his beloved daughter. And if you look at it from the governmental point of view, it’s an enviable resolution. Cunning! No wonder His Majesty prefers skittles and chess to all other games. He calculated a multistep combination, drew back, and swung the bat at his own. Knocked a fattened son-in-law out of the Inner Circle. And immediately strengthened the people’s love for him two- or threefold. Gave the Inner Circle something to think about: don’t go too far. He reigned in the departmental clerks: that’s how a statesman should act. He energized us, the oprichniks: in the New Russia no one is untouchable. No one is and no one can be. And thank God.


Dystopia(n) Matters: On the Page, on Screen, on Stage

Dystopia is no doubt relevant if we think of it as a “concerted, strategic and practically oriented reflection on a future” 

Krishan Kumar traces the genealogy of dystopia, stressing the idea that it “emerged in the wake of utopia”. According to Kumar, “[T]he earliest forms [of utopia] seem to have been satires on the rationalist and scientific utopias of More and Bacon

As Davis concludes, “[D]ystopia serves not to highlight the futility and folly of all utopian aspirations, but to remind us of its historically and biographically rooted origins and limits”. 

The critical dystopia, Fortunati insists, “prefigure[s] 
 a horizon of hope”, “showing the reader a road that must start in the present, a dialectic that must begin from now-here”. 

dystopia is needed because it presents us a gloomy future we have definitely to avoid, but it really only works when it is assisted by its counterpart, eutopia, which “remind[s] us that better, while difficult, is possible”. 

One of the first utopias I ever read, I and many others thought of as a dystopia, while the author and many others were quite clear that it was a eutopia. That book was B.F. Skinner’s  Walden Two (1948), and even though I read it negatively, I had to admit that Skinner saw it positively, and he said so many times. As a result, it is clear from both internal and external evidence together with the fact that a number of people decided to establish intentional communities modelled on Skinner’s vision as expressed in the book that a book could be both a eutopia and a dystopia depending on the reader (on Walden Two communities, see Kuhlman). 


 I contend that the dystopia, mostly without the religious element, does the same thing, although often only implicitly. The dystopia is presented as what has happened as a result of human behaviour, of people messing up, as, in the Old Testament version, sin. And given the resurgence of Christian dystopianism, the Old Testament version is still relevant. But the message is also quite clearly, it does not have to be like this. And to me this is the important point.

We need the dystopia to remind us that our dystopia could get worse, but we need the eutopia even more to remind us that better, while difficult, is possible. 

pessimism of the intellect, optimism of the will

Lyman Tower Sargent characterises anti-utopia as “a non-existent society described in considerable detail and normally located in time and space that the author intended the contemporaneous reader to view as a criticism of utopianism or of some particular eutopia

 a community whose hegemonic principles pretend to its being more perfectly organized than any thinkable alternative, while our representative 
 “camera eye” and value-monger finds out it is significantly less perfect than an alternative, a polemic nightmare. 

the scepticism of the conservative eighteenth-century intellectuals”, and not necessarily with the rise of totalitarian systems in the first half of the twentieth century (Vieira, 2010: 16). She points out that the term 
 “dystopia” is used not only as a general designation of “imaginary places that were worse than real places” but also as a literary sub-genre that evolved from both satirical utopia and anti-utopia, rejecting “the idea that man can reach perfection”

What they parody, ridicule or reject are the particular “utopian” solutions and their consequences. 


 Baccolini, Raffaella / Tom Moylan (eds.) (2003),  

. If in Europe utopia is seen as a fictional (“unreal”) alternative to the existing state of affairs, the utopian experiment in America becomes literally more “real” than the reality it seeks to alter or escape, particularly if that reality is seen as only a transitory stage in the progress towards the utopia of popular/hegemonic ideology. In other words, the utopian experiment stands in opposition not only to the imperfect present but also to another vision of the allegedly perfect future. 

Seen in this context, American culture offers a very unique situation in which both literary and “realised” utopias appear in a country that projects itself as a utopia. Thus, we have a case of a utopia-in-a-utopia, resembling that of a text-in-a-text, which has far-reaching consequences for the status of practical utopian experiments or texts calling for a radically different mode of social organisation. Whilst the position of the futuristic literary utopias can, in principle, be that of a manifestation or even self-description of the mainstream “utopian” culture, the relationship between the latter and the more radical proposals may become mutually antagonistic.

. American anti-utopia was neither a response to nor a parody of a mode of discourse but an attack, satirical or otherwise, not so much on utopianism as a project or theory as on its practical manifestations. The situation is made even more interesting by the fact that in the early stages of its history and development America itself was supposed to embody the utopian ideal. Early colonies such as Pennsylvania, South Carolina and Georgia were expressly intended as ideal societies. Whilst early Puritan settlers firmly believed in the Millennium, by the beginning of the eighteenth century it was the secularised idea of the “city upon a hill”, a theocratic utopia, that seemed to be the dominant ideal, later strengthened by the persisting and apparently largely genuine cult of the Constitution, which can be seen as a contemporary reflection of its utopian origins.

dystopias are jeremiads”, because they are often similar, in their approach, to the “early Puritan sermons in New England” which “accus[ed] the people of backsliding, of losing the confidence of God (…[and went]) into great detail about the specific ways that the peoples (…[had]) erred”. The dystopia, Sargent contends, “mostly without the religious element, does 
 Fátima Vieira 
 3 
 
 the same thing, although often implicitly. The dystopia is presented as what has happened as a result of human behaviour, of people messing up”. 

own famously caustic comments on “utopian” socialism, many Marxists 

Existence of God

Hey, Whipple, Squeeze This

No matter

 how cynical I get, it’s impossible to keep up.”




Viewers couldn’t wait for the next airing of VW’s “Funeral” or Alka-Seltzer’s “Spicy meatball.”

reverie.

How to write an interesting ad? Try this: ‘Hello. I want to tell you something important or interesting or useful or funny. It’s about you. I won’t take very long and there’s a prize if you stay till the very end.’ ”8
Note: Klaert!

I Want to Keep Smashing Myself Until I Am Whole

Almost three decades after Canetti’s passing (Zurich, 1994), here he is again, in America, a country he alternately ignored and derided. I can’t help but wonder which favor America will return on this occasion. I accepted the honor of putting Canetti between fresh covers because I, like pretty much everyone else during the past two years of pandemic-caused lockdown and crowd avoidance, became interested in “freedom”—rather, I became interested in why I’m often ashamed to speak that word, and why I’m often ashamed to admit that I’m ashamed to speak it, and so on. Perhaps my reaction has to do with the clunk of the verbiage itself—I can’t help but regard that “-dom” slapped onto the end as vaguely sadomasochistically sexual—or perhaps it’s the hint of sanctimony or sham piety with which it tends to be 

entire races—yearned and fought for collective freedoms and self-determined governance. Consider the innocence of early Zionism, or the patriotic fervor of Ottoman- and Habsburg-era Bulgarians, Romanians, Slovenes, Croats, and Poles. But sometime after the Second World War, in which Germany failed to re-create by force a perverse version of the empires that crumbled in the First, these notions of autonomy suffered a contraction, especially in America: now the entity seeking freedom was doing so not in an imperial but in a national context and was more likely to be the subgroup (female, gay, black), or the individual subsumed into multiple groups at the intersections of depersonalized identity.


 might be that my discomfort with the word “freedom” is only my discomfort with the exclusionary politics of those who abuse it (in much the same way, I’m disturbed by the exemptionary politics of those who abuse “liberty”). But then it might also have to do with the fact that I was born in 1980 and so grew up in an America that was still cheering the collapse of the Soviet Union when it was attacked by religious fundamentalists and reacted by declaring war on the world—an endless technologized jihad of surveillance and control that by now has lasted half my lifetime. Whatever the cause of my word-aversion, the fact remains: as I became an adult, I found it harder and harder to write the word “free” without irony and to read the word “free” without thinking that it referred to something that cost nothing. As a writer—not just as a writer in a free society, but as a writer period—it sometimes feels as if I possess, or would be able to possess, every freedom except one, which is the freedom to be unpolitical, the freedom not to have my every sentence be judged by the terms of my identity, as construed by each of my readers.
 Canetti, exile, cosmopole, polyglot, was among the first modern voices who refused this—among the first modern voices who refused identity and politics and their conflation in what’s now called “identity politics,” which his Viennese experience told him was the primary sign, or symptom, of the individual’s absorption by the crowd, or of the crowd’s co-option of selfhood and independent conscience. Canetti’s scorning of this crowd-consumed human was akin to his scorning of Freudian orthodoxy and of the fashionable Marxist, or Marxish, Frankfurt thought of Adorno, Horkheimer, Marcuse, and Habermas: he abhorred the former’s tendency to relate all behavior and ideation to trauma, just as he abhorred the latter’s tendency to relate all behavior and ideation to capital. “I want to keep smashing myself until I am whole,” this indefinable, unassimilable Spanish-Jewish, Ottoman-Balkan, Viennese, British, Swiss world citizen wrote in one of his Aufzeichnungen from the start of the 1950s, when Europe had been smashed and wholeness was no longer the property of crowds but the ambition of the information-crowded individual.
 Canetti’s destructive-creative act takes the violence he witnessed in Vienna and turns it inward: the smashing that he’s advocating is one in which we individually shatter our superficial vocabularies

He wavers uncertainly between his descendants and his forebears. Which are more reliable? Who offer him more?
 
 No sooner does the mere possibility of success appear on the horizon, than he tries to escape. His mistrust of success has become so great that he wants only to want it, not to have it.
 
 I should like to contain everything within myself yet stay quite simple. That is hard. For I don’t want to lose this variety, much as I wish to be simple.
 The mystic’s nature is not mine; it seems to me the mystic sacrifices too much for his happiness.
 
 It all depends on this: with whom we confuse ourselves.
 
 This tenderness toward everything we have seen before, and this revulsion toward so much we are seeing now.
 
 His fear of all his endless little notebooks! By now they are mounting into the hundreds, every page covered, and he never opens a one of them! This prolific writer of nothing, what is so important for him to tell no one?


My earliest memory is dipped in red. I come out of a door on the arm of a maid, the floor in front of me is red, and to the left a staircase goes down, equally red. Across from us, at the same height, a door opens, and a smiling man steps forth, walking toward me in a friendly way. He steps right up close to me, halts, and says: “Show me your tongue.” I stick out my tongue, he reaches into his pocket, pulls out a jackknife, opens it, and brings the blade all the way to my tongue. He says: “Now we’ll cut off his tongue.” I don’t dare pull back my tongue, he comes closer and closer, the blade will touch me any second. In the last moment, he pulls back the knife, saying: “Not today, tomorrow.” He snaps the knife shut again and puts it back in his pocket.
 Every morning, we step out of the door and into the red hallway, the door opens, and the smiling man appears. I know what he’s going to say and I wait for the command to show my tongue. I know he’s going to cut it off, and I get more and more scared each time. That’s how the day starts, and it happens very often.
 
 I kept it to myself and asked my mother about it only much later. She could tell by the ubiquitous red that it was the guesthouse in Carlsbad, where she had spent the summer of 1907 with my father and me. To take care of the two-year-old baby, she had brought along a nanny from Bulgaria, a girl who wasn’t even fifteen. Every morning at the crack of dawn, the girl went out holding the child on her arm; she spoke only Bulgarian, but got along fine in the lively town, and was always back punctually with the child. Once, she was seen on the street with an unknown young man, she couldn’t say anything about him, a chance 

Every Friday, the Gypsies came. On Friday, the Jewish homes prepared everything for the Sabbath. The house was cleaned from top to bottom, the Bulgarian girls scooted all over the place, the kitchen hummed with activity, no one had time for me. I was all alone and waiting for the Gypsies, my face pressed against the garden window of the gigantic living room. I lived in panic fear of them. I assume it was the girls who also told me about Gypsies during the long evenings in the darkness. I thought about their stealing children and was convinced that they were after me.
 But despite my fear, I wouldn’t have missed seeing them; it was a splendid sight they offered. The courtyard gate had been opened wide for them, for they needed space. They came like an entire tribe: in the middle, tall and erect, a blind patriarch, the great-grandfather, as I was told, a handsome, white-haired old man; he walked very slowly, leaning on two grown granddaughters right and left and wearing colorful rags. Around him, thronging densely, there were Gypsies of all ages, very few men, almost nothing but women, and countless children, the infants in their mother’s arms; the rest sprang about, but never moved very far from the proud old man, who always remained the center. The whole procession had something strangely dense about it, I never otherwise saw so many people huddling so close together as they moved along; and in

Sometimes, when Grandfather Canetti was in the store, I was taken over to his house to pay respects to my grandmother. She sat on the Turkish divan, smoking and drinking strong coffee. She always stayed home, she never went out; I can’t recall ever seeing her outside the house. Her name was Laura and, like Grandfather, she came from Adrianople. He called her “Oro,” which actually means “gold,” I never understood her name. Of all the relatives, she was the one that remained most Turkish. She never got up from her divan, I don’t even know how she ever got there, for I never saw her walking, and she would sigh from time to time and drink another cup of coffee and smoke. She would greet me with a lamenting tone and, having said nothing to me, she let me go, lamenting. 

she must have suffered under Grandfather, who was fiendishly lively.
 Wherever he appeared, he was always instantly the center, which I didn’t realize at the time; he was feared in his family, a tyrant who could weep hot tears if he wanted to. He felt most comfortable with his grandsons, who bore his name. Among friends and acquaintances, indeed throughout the Sephardic community, he was popular for his beautiful voice, which women particularly succumbed to. Whenever he was invited anywhere, he never took Grandmother along; he couldn’t stand her stupidity and her continuous wailing. He was instantly surrounded by a big circle of people, told stories in which he played many parts, and on special occasions, he yielded to entreaties to sing.


A huge mulberry tree stood there, with low branches and easy to climb. I was not allowed to climb it, but Mother never passed it without showing me a branch at the top; it was her hiding place, where she used to sit as a young girl when she wanted to read undisturbed. She would steal up there with her book and sit there as quiet as a mouse, and she did it so cleverly that they couldn’t see her from below, and when they called her, she didn’t 

hear, because she liked the book so much; she read all her books up there. Not far from the mulberry tree, steps led up to the house; the residential rooms were higher than in our house, but the corridors were dark. We would walk through many rooms until the last room, where Grandfather sat in an armchair, a small, pale man, always warmly bundled in scarves and tartans; he was sickly.



 It took a long time; no one grew tired of it, and people kept standing around in a dense throng. I can’t see Father or Mother among them, I can’t see any of the individual people who made up my life. I only see them all together, and if I hadn’t used the word so frequently later on, I would say 

. Later I found out that they had fallen in love during such conversations, and while neither of them had managed to make their dream of the theater come true—both had passionately wanted to act—they did succeed in getting married despite a great deal of opposition.


One day, the courtyard was filled with smoke; a few of our girls ran out into the street and promptly came back with the excited news that a neighborhood house was on fire. It was already all in flames and about to burn up. Instantly, the three houses around our courtyard emptied, and except for my grandmother, who never rose from her divan, all the tenants ran out toward the blaze. It happened so fast that they forgot all about me. I was a little scared to be all alone like that; also I felt like going out, perhaps to the fire, perhaps even more in the direction I saw them all running in. So I ran through the open courtyard gate out into the street, which I was not allowed to do, and I wound up in the racing torrent of people. Luckily, I soon caught sight of two of our older girls, and since they wouldn’t have changed directions for anything in the world, they thrust me between themselves and hastily pulled me along. They halted at some distance from the conflagration, perhaps so as not to endanger me, and thus, for the first time in my life, I saw a burning house. It was already far gone; beams were collapsing and sparks were flying. The evening was gathering, it slowly became dark, and the fire shone brighter and brighter. But what made an even greater impact on me than the blazing house was the people moving around it.

This scene, which has remained unforgettable for me, later merged into the works of a painter, so that I no longer could say what was original and what was added by those paintings. I was nineteen, in Vienna, when I stood before Brueghel’s pictures. I instantly recognized the many little people of that fire in my childhood. The pictures were as familiar to me as if I had always moved among them. I felt a tremendous attraction to them and came over every day. That part of my life which had commenced with the fire continued immediately in these paintings, as though fifteen years had not gone by in between. Brueghel became the most important painter for me; but I did not absorb him, as so many later things, by contemplation and reflection. I found him present within me as though, certain that I would have to come to him, he had been awaiting me for a long time.

His life, in which nothing, absolutely nothing, happened. He embarked on no adventures, he was in no war. He was never in prison, he never killed anyone. He neither won nor lost a fortune. All he ever did was live in this century. But that alone was enough to give his life dimension, both of feeling and of thought.
 

To mangle a sentence into a landscape.

Every forgotten idea crops up again on the other side of the world.
 

Your original sin: you opened your mouth. As long as you listen, you are innocent.

A labyrinth made of all the paths one has taken.

The day of her arrival, I didn’t see him, he didn’t come to the nursery that evening. But he reappeared the very next morning and got my little brother to talk. “Georgie,” he said; “Canetti,” said the boy; “Two,” said Father; “Three,” said the boy; “Four,” said Father; “Burton,” said the boy; “Road,” said Father; “West,” said the boy; “Didsbury,” said Father; “Manchester,” said the boy; “England,” said Father; and I, in the end, very loudly and superfluously, said, “Europe.” So our address was together again. There are no words that I have retained more sharply, they were my father’s last words.

He went down to breakfast as usual. Before long, we heard loud yells. The governess dashed down the stairs, I at her heels. By the open door to the dining room, I saw my father lying on the floor. He was stretched out full length, between the table and the fireplace, very close to the fireplace, his face was white, he had foam on his mouth, Mother knelt at his side, crying: “Jacques, speak to me, speak to me, Jacques, Jacques, speak to me!” She kept shouting it over and over again, people came, our neighbors the Brockbanks, a Quaker couple, strangers walked in off the street. I stood by the door, Mother grabbed her head, tore hair out, and kept shouting. I took a timid step into the room, toward my father, I didn’t understand, I wanted to ask him, then I heard someone say: “Take the child away.” The Brockbanks gently took my arm, led me out into the street, and into their front yard.


 But the real reason was that I had to learn German first. I was eight years old, I was to attend school in Vienna, and my age would put me in the third grade of elementary school there. My mother could not bear the thought of my perhaps not being accepted into this grade because of my ignorance of the language, and she was resolved to teach me German in a jiffy.
 Not very long after our arrival, we went to a bookshop; she asked for an English-German grammar, bought the first book they showed her, took me home immediately, and began instruction. How can I depict that instruction believably? I know how it went—how could I forget?—but I still can’t believe it myself.
 We sat at the big table in the dining room, I on the narrower side, with a view of the lake and the sails. She sat around the corner to my left and held the textbook in such a way that I couldn’t look in. She always kept it far from me. “You don’t need it,” she said, “you can’t understand it yet anyway.” But despite this explanation, I felt she was withholding the book like a secret. She read a German sentence to me and had me repeat it. Disliking my accent, she made me repeat the sentence several times, until it struck her as tolerable. But this didn’t occur often, for she derided me for my accent, and since I couldn’t stand her derision for anything in the world, I made an effort and soon pronounced the sentence correctly. Only then did she tell me what the sentence meant in English. But this she never repeated, I had to note it instantly and for all time. Then she quickly went on to the next sentence and followed the same procedure; as soon as I pronounced it correctly, she translated 

His eyes grew accustomed to the darkness. But he could not read; that was a great pity. He pulled down one volume after another, turned over the pages, contrived to make out many of the names. Later on he scrambled up onto the ladder. He wanted to know if the upper shelves had any secrets to hide. He tumbled off it and said: I haven’t hurt myself! The floor is hard. The books are soft. In a bookshop one falls on books. He could have made a castle of books, but he regarded disorder as vulgar and, as he took out each new volume, he replaced the one before. His back hurt. Perhaps he was only tired. At home he would have been asleep long ago. Not here, excitement kept him awake. But his eyes could not even make out the largest titles anymore and that annoyed him. He worked out how many years he would be able to spend reading in this shop without ever going out into the street or to that silly school. Why could he not stay here always? He could easily save up to buy himself a small bed. His mother would be afraid. So was he, but only a little, because it was so very quiet. The gas lamps in the street went out. Shadows crept along the walls. So there were ghosts. During the night they came flying here and crouched over the books. Then they read. They needed no light, they had such big eyes. Now he would not touch a single book on the upper shelves, nor on the lower ones either.

He crept under the counter and his teeth chattered. Ten thousand books and a ghost crouching over each one. That was why it was so quiet. Sometimes he heard them turn over a page. They read as fast as he did himself. He might have grown used to them, but there were ten thousand of them and perhaps one of them would bite. Ghosts get cross if you brush against them, they think you are making fun of them. He made himself as small as possible; they flew over him without touching him. 

“My master commanded me to learn three thousand characters every day and to write down another thousand each evening. In the short winter days the sun went down early and I had not finished my task. I carried my little tablet onto the veranda which faced the west and finished my writing there. Late in the evening, when I was going through what I had written, I could no longer overcome my weariness. So I placed two buckets of water behind me. When I grew too sleepy, I took off my gown and emptied the first bucket over myself. Naked, I sat down to my work again. Gradually I would grow warmer and sleepy again. Then I would use the second bucket. With the help of two shower baths I was nearly always able to complete my task. In that winter I entered my ninth year.”
 Moved and ablaze with admiration, he clapped the book to. “That was the way they used to learn! A fragment from the childhood recollections of the Japanese scholar Arai Hakuseki.

An old man who learned late,” Plato called his opponent, the cynic philosopher Antisthenes.

That night he saw a man standing, bound fast, on the terrace of a temple, defending himself with wooden clubs from the savage attacks of two upright jaguars on his left and right. Both animals were decked with strange streamers in all colors. They gnashed their teeth, roared, and rolled their eyes so wildly that it made the blood run cold. The sky was black and narrow, and had hidden his stars in his pocket. Tears of glass trickled out of the eyes of the prisoner and splintered into a thousand pieces as they reached the pavement. But as nothing further happened, the savage combat grew boring and made the spectator yawn. Then by chance his eye fell on the feet of the jaguars. They had human feet. Aha, thought the spectator—a lanky, learned man—these are sacrificial priests of ancient Mexico. They are performing a sacred comedy. The victim knows well that he must die in the end. The priests are disguised as jaguars but I see through them at once.
 The jaguar on the right seized a heavy stone wedge and drove it into the victim’s heart. One edge of it clove sharp through the breastbone. Kien closed his eyes, dazzled. 

But why blame himself? He was in the middle of it. Where are you? Where are you? The flames dazzled him. And what the devil was this, wherever he reached out, he could get hold of nothing but shrieking human beings. They clutched hold of him with all their strength. He hurled them from him, they came back to him. They crept to him from below and entwined his knees; from above his head burning torches rained down on him. He was not looking up yet he saw them clearly. They seized on his ears, his hair, his shoulders. They enchained him with their bodies. Bedlam broke loose. “Let me go,” he shouted, “I don’t know you. What do you want with me! How can I rescue the books!”
 But one of them had thrown himself against his mouth, and clung fast to his tightly closed lips. He wanted to speak again, but he could not open his mouth. He implored them in his mind: I can’t save them! I can’t save them! He wanted to cry, but where were his tears? His eyes too were closed fast; human beings were pressing against them too. He tried to step free of them, he lifted his right leg high in the air; in vain, it was dragged back again, 

dragged down by a burden of burning humankind, dragged down by a leaden weight. He abhorred them, these greedy creatures; could they not be satisfied with the life they had had? He loathed them. He would have liked to hurt them, torment them, reproach them; he could do nothing, nothing! Not for one moment did he forget why he was there. They might hold his eyes forcibly shut, but in his spirit he could see mightily. He saw a book growing in every direction at once until it filled the sky and the earth and the whole of space to the very horizon. At its edges a reddish glow, slowly, quietly, devoured it. Proud, silent, uncomplaining, it endured a martyr’s death. Men screamed and shrieked, the book burned without a word. Martyrs do not cry out, saints do not cry out.
 Then a voice spoke; in it was all knowledge, for it was the voice of God: “There are no books here. All is vanity.” And at once Kien knew that the voice spoke truth. Lightly, he threw off the burning mob and jumped out of the fire. He was saved. Did it hurt then? Terribly, he answered himself, but not so much as people usually think. He was extraordinarily happy about the voice. He could see himself, dancing away from the altar. At a little distance, he turned round. He was tempted to laugh at the empty fire.


The woman who sat opposite was certainly a great deal younger, but she already had four children; Therese had none. “Children last.” That sounded straightforward enough, but what did she really mean by it? She probably wanted no children; neither did he. He had never thought about children. For what purpose had she said that?

Perhaps she took him for a person of no morals. But she knew his life. For eight years she had been aware of all his habits. She knew that he was a man of character. Did he ever go out at night? Had a woman ever called on him, even for a quarter of an hour? When she had first taken up her post with him, he had most emphatically explained to her that he received no visitors on principle, male or female, of whatever age, from infants in arms to octogenarians. She was to send everyone away. “I have no time!” Those had been his very words. What devil had got into her? That shameless cobbler, perhaps? She was an innocent ingenuous creature; how otherwise, uneducated as she was, could she have acquired so great a love for books? But that dirty fellow’s pantomime had been all too obvious. His gestures were self-explanatory; a child, without even knowing the reasons for his movements, would have understood that he had a woman in his arms. People of that kind, capable of losing control of themselves in the open street, ought to be segregated in asylums. They induce ugly thoughts in hardworking people. She was a hardworking woman. The cobbler had insinuated ideas into her head. Why else should children have occurred to her? It was not impossible that she might have heard something about such things. Women talk among themselves. She had perhaps been present at a birth,

when she was in some other service. What did it signify if she did indeed know all there was to know? Better perhaps than if he had to explain it to her himself. There was a certain bashfulness in her expression; at her age it was faintly comic.
 I never thought of asking anything so vulgar of her; it did not cross my mind. I have no time. I need six hours’ sleep. I work until twelve, at six o’clock I get up. Dogs and other animals may do such things by day. Perhaps she expects something of the kind from marriage. Hardly. Children last. Fool. All she meant was that she knew what was necessary. She knew the chain of circumstances whose conclusion is the perfected child. She was trying to explain herself gracefully. She took the occasion of this little incident, the children were importunate, the words were apt, but her eyes were fixed on me alone; it did for a confession. Most understandable. Such admissions are naturally painful. I married because of the books; children last. That means nothing at all. I remember her saying that children learned too little. I read out to her a paragraph of Arai Hakuseki. She was quite carried away. That was how she first betrayed herself. Who knows how otherwise I could have guessed her feeling for books. At that moment we were drawn together. Probably she only meant to remind me of that. She is still the same. Her views on children

have not altered since then. My friends are her friends. My enemies will be her enemies. The brief speech of an innocent mind. She had no conception of any other relationship. I must be careful. She might be frightened. I shall act very cautiously. How shall I open the subject to her? It is difficult to speak of it. I have no books on it. Buy one? What would the bookseller think? I am not that kind of man. Send someone for it? But who? She herself—for shame—my own wife! How can I be so cowardly. I must try myself. I, myself. But suppose she is unwilling. Suppose she screams. The people in the other flats—the caretaker—the police—the mob. But they can do nothing to me. I am married to her. I have a right. How disgusting! How came I to think of it? I am the one whom that cobbler has infected. Shame on you. After forty years. And now to behave in this way. I shall spare her. Children last. If I only knew what she meant. Sphinx.
 The mother of the four children stood up. “Look out!

Also I love the fact that he became known so late and that despite, or even because of, this he never gave up hope. Despite the many falsifications of life that he allowed into his “ideal” tales, he loved life as it is.
 For me, this is the sole criterion of the epic talent: a knowledge of life even at its most horrific, a passionate love for it nonetheless, a love that never despairs, for it is inviolable even in its desperation. Nor is it really tied to a belief, for it originates in the variety of life, its unknown, astonishing, wondrous variety, its unpredictable twists and turns. For those who cannot stop pursuing life, it changes in the pursuit into a hundred new, overwhelmingly remarkable creatures; and for those who just as tirelessly chase after all hundred of them, they will change into a thousand others, all just as new.


Stendhal’s head was filled with things of “culture”—pictures, books, music—many of which are as important to me today as they were to him then. Many more are indifferent or repellently “sentimental”; the important point is how he was taken up by these things. He extracts from everything only that which is like himself. Thus I can perhaps console myself for being so preoccupied with barbarians and religions, since it is possible that they have become very much like me. Whether it’s Canova or Wotruba, the accident of birth plays only an external role here. The passion with which one possesses every object and the passion with which one distances oneself in contemplation of it—that is everything.
 
Note: Referenser

His face—was it one of those which anyone would remember from a single glance? He stopped in front of the mirror outside a hairdresser’s and surveyed his features. Watery blue eyes, and no cheeks at all. His forehead, ridged as a rock face, from which his nose plunged at right angles toward the abyss, an edge dizzily narrow. At its base, almost hidden, cowered two minute black insects. No one would have guessed them to be nostrils. His mouth as the slot of a machine. Two sharp lines, like artificial scars, ran from his temples to his chin and met at its point. These and his nose divided his long and lean face into five strips of a terrifying narrowness; narrow, but strictly symmetrical; there was no room to linger anywhere and Kien did not linger.

Our Umwelt is still limited; it just doesn’t feel that way. To us, it feels all-encompassing. It is all that we know, and so we easily mistake it for all there is to know. This is an illusion, and one that every animal shares.
			 We cannot sense the faint electric fields that sharks and platypuses can. We are not privy to the magnetic fields that robins and sea turtles detect. We can’t trace the invisible trail of a swimming fish the way a seal can. We can’t feel the air currents created by a buzzing fly the way a wandering spider does. Our ears cannot hear the ultrasonic calls of rodents and hummingbirds or the infrasonic calls of elephants and whales. Our eyes cannot see the infrared radiation that rattlesnakes detect or the ultraviolet light that the birds and the bees can sense.
			 Even when animals share the same senses with us, their Umwelten can be very different. There are animals that can hear sounds in what seems to us like perfect silence, see colors in what looks to us like total darkness, and sense vibrations in what feels to us like complete stillness. There

Light is just electromagnetic radiation. Sound is just waves of pressure. Smells are just small molecules. It’s not obvious that we should be able to detect any of those things, let alone convert them into electrical signals or derive from those signals the spectacle of a sunrise, or the sound of a voice, or the scent of baking bread. The senses transform the coursing chaos of the world into perceptions and experiences—things we can react to and act upon. They allow biology to tame physics. They turn stimuli into information.

The platypus’s bill is loaded with sensors that detect electric fields and sensors that are sensitive to pressure; does the platypus’s brain treat these streams of information differently, or does it wield a single sense of electrotouch?

Note: Kanner jattemkt

. I’m reminded of Hamlet’s plea to Horatio that “there are more things in heaven and Earth…than are dreamt of in your philosophy.” The quote is often taken as an appeal to embrace the supernatural. I see it rather as a call to better understand the natural. Senses that seem paranormal to us only appear this way because we are so limited and so painfully unaware of our 

As the writer Marcel Proust once said, “The only true voyage…would be not to visit strange lands but to possess other eyes…to see the hundred universes that each of them sees.”

Food and foes aside, few sources of odor are as pertinent to an elephant as other elephants. They’ll regularly inspect each other with their trunks, probing away at glands, genitals, and mouths. When African elephants reunite after a prolonged separation, they go through intense greeting rituals. Human observers can see their flapping ears and hear their throaty rumbles, but for the elephants themselves, the experience must also be olfactory pandemonium. They vigorously urinate and defecate, while aromatic liquid pours forth from glands behind their eyes, filling the air around them with scents.
			 Few people have done more to study elephant odors than Bets Rasmussen,[*20] a biochemist who was once crowned “the queen of elephant secretions, excretions and exhalations.” If an elephant produced it, Rasmussen likely sniffed it and possibly tasted

When they walk their favorite routes and encounter the smelly deposits of other elephants, what are they getting besides identity? Do they know the emotional states of those previous passers-by? Can they sense stress or diagnose illnesses? What of their wider environment? Elephants that have returned to postwar Angola seem to skirt around the millions of landmines that still dot the land—unsurprising, perhaps, given how quickly they can be trained to detect TNT. They’ve been known to dig wells in times of 

There’s hardly a place you can touch a catfish without brushing thousands of taste buds. If you lick one of them, you’ll both simultaneously taste each other.[*32] “If I were a catfish, I’d love to jump into a vat of chocolate,” John Caprio tells me. “You could taste it with your butt.”

Through their actions, cells can detect and react to the substances around them. This process is temporary: After the GPCRs are done, they either release or destroy the molecules that they’ve grabbed. But one group of them bucks this trend: opsins. They are special because they keep hold of their target molecules, and because those molecules absorb light. This is the entire basis of vision. This is how all animals see—using light-sensitive proteins that are actually modified chemical sensors.
			 In a way, we see by smelling light.

Humans are such a visual species that those of us with sight instinctively equate active eyes with an active intellect. In their flitting, darting movements, we see another curious mind investigating the world. In the case of jumping spiders, this is not unwarranted anthropomorphism. Despite their poppy-seed-sized brains, they really are surprisingly smart.[*1] The Portia species are famed for planning out strategic routes when stalking prey, or flexibly switching between sophisticated hunting tactics. The

And unlike other spiders that mostly sense the world through vibrations and touch, jumping spiders rely on vision. That’s why the eight eyes occupy up to half the volume of their large heads. They are the spiders whose Umwelten are closest to ours. In that similarity, I find affinity. I watch the spider, and it watches me back, two starkly different species connected by our dominant sense.

Look at a full, living scallop, and you’ll see a very different animal. And that animal will see you, too. Each half of a scallop’s fan-shaped shell has eyes arrayed along its inner edge—dozens in some species, and up to 200 in others. In the bay scallop, the eyes look like neon blueberries. Speiser finds them “funny and horrifying and charming,” all at once.
			 It is strange enough that scallops have eyes when most other bivalves like mussels and oysters do not. It’s even stranger that those eyes, as Mike Land showed in the 1960s, are complex. Each one sits at the end of a mobile tentacle. Each has a little pupil: “It’s wild and creepy to see all of them opening and closing at the same time,” Speiser says. Light passes through the pupil and hits the back of the scallop’s eye, where it is reflected by a curved mirror. The mirror is a precisely tiled array of square crystals that collectively focus light onto the scallop’s retinas. That’s retinas, plural. There are two per eye, and they are about as different as two animal retinas could be.[*12] Between them, they have thousands of photoreceptors, which gives them enough spatial resolution to detect small objects. “Their optics are really good,” Speiser says.[

Why do they need such a complicated eye, let alone dozens or hundreds of them? What does a scallop use its vision for? To find out, Speiser ran an experiment that he called Scallop TV. He strapped their shells to small seats, placed them in front of a monitor, and showed them computer-generated movies of small, drifting particles. It was such a ridiculous setup that no one seriously thought that it would work. But it did: If the particles were large enough and moving slowly enough, the scallops opened their shells, as if ready to feed. “It was the craziest thing I’ve ever seen,” Johnsen tells me.
			 At the time, Speiser thought that scallops must use their eyes to spot potential food. Now he thinks something else is happening. Interspersed between their eyes are tentacles that scallops use to smell molecules in the water. Speiser thinks they use smell to recognize predators like starfish and vision to detect things that are simply worth an investigative sniff. When they opened their shells in response to Scallop

My guess is that we were seeing scallops being curious,

But if that’s the case, why does each individual eye have such good resolution? Why do sophisticated components like the mirrors and double retinas exist? Why are there so many eyes when just a few could cover the entire space around the scallop’s shell? Why have such good eyes evolved in an animal whose brain can barely handle the information they convey?[*15] No one knows. “Sometimes I feel like I can almost get my mind around it, and extend my empathy into scallops,” Speiser tells me. “But a lot of the time I feel lost again.”[*16]
			 Some animals might have the scallop’s distributed vision without possessing eyes at all. The brittle star Ophiomastix wendtii looks like a skinny, spiny starfish, or perhaps like five centipedes wriggling out of a hockey puck. It doesn’t have any obvious eyes, but it clearly 

In 2012, Martin and his colleagues measured the griffon vulture’s visual field—the space around its head that its eyes can cover. They got each bird to rest its beak on a specially fitted holder, and then looked into its eyes from all directions with a visual perimeter. “It’s the same device that an optician would use when you get an eye test,” Martin told me at the time. “It’s just a question of sitting the bird down for half an hour. One tried to grab at me and I did lose a bit of my thumb.”
			 The perimeter revealed that a vulture’s visual field covers the space on either side of its head but has large blind spots above and below.

Their ultrafast hunts are guided by ultrafast vision. It may seem strange to talk about animals seeing at different speeds, because light is the fastest thing in the universe, and vision seems instantaneous to us. But eyes don’t work at light speed. It takes time for photoreceptors to react to incoming photons, and for the electrical signals they generate to travel to the brain. In killer flies, evolution has pushed these steps to their limits. When Gonzalez-Bellido shows these insects an image, it takes just 6 to 9 milliseconds for their photoreceptors to send electrical signals, for those signals to reach their brains, and for their brains to send commands to their muscles.[*22] By contrast, it takes between 30 and 60 milliseconds for human photoreceptors to accomplish just the first of those 

The eyes of a scallop are positively glacial (1 to 5 Hz), and those of nocturnal toads are slower still (0.25 to 0.5 Hz). Those of leatherback turtles (15 Hz) and harp seals (23 Hz) are faster but still sluggish. Those of swordfish aren’t much better under normal conditions (5 Hz), but these fish can heat up their eyes and brains with a special muscle, boosting the speed of their vision by eight times. Many birds have naturally fast vision; with a maximum CFF of 146 Hz, the pied flycatcher—a small songbird—has the fastest vision of any vertebrate that’s been tested, perhaps because its survival depends on tracking and catching flying insects.[*24] And those insects have eyes that are faster still. Honeybees, dragonflies, and flies have CFFs between 200 and 350 Hz.
			 It’s possible that each of these visual speeds comes with a different sense of time’s passage. Through a leatherback turtle’s eyes, the world might seem to move in time-lapse, with humans bustling about at a fly’s frenetic pace. Through a fly’s eyes, the world might seem to move in slow motion. The imperceptibly fast movements of other flies would slow to a perceptible crawl, while slow animals might not seem like they were moving at 

The blue is now almost laser-like—eerily pure and all-encompassing. Through it, silvery fish dart about. Gelatinous jellyfish and siphonophores slowly snake past. At 300 meters, it’s as dark as a moonlit night, and getting darker. Gradually, the fish get blacker, the invertebrates redder. Increasingly, they produce their own light, and their bioluminescent flashes paint the outline of your descending submersible. At 850 meters, the residual sunlight is so faint that your eyes can no longer function. At 1,000 meters, no animal eyes can. This is the beginning of the bathypelagic or midnight zone. The complex visual scenes of the surface are long gone and have been replaced by a living star-field of bioluminescence, twinkling in the otherwise total darkness. Depending on where you are in the world, there might be another 10,000 meters of ocean left to go.
			 The deep ocean

The way to think about ocean exploration is that we probably create a sphere a hundred yards wide that keeps away anything that can get away,” says Sonke Johnsen. “Most of the time, we’re seeing terror and blindness. We see how animals behave when

So when a group of these monkeys cavorts through the treetops in search of food, some will see red fruits against green leaves, while others will only see yellows and grays. Even brothers and sisters can perceive different colors.
			 It’s easy to assume that the dichromats must be at a disadvantage. But after 15 years of studying white-faced capuchins in the forests of Costa Rica, Amanda Melin thinks differently. By following several groups of these monkeys, she learned to identify every individual on sight. And by collecting their poop and sequencing their DNA, she worked out which were trichromats and which were dichromats. Neither group, she found, is more likely to survive or reproduce than the other. The trichromats are indeed better at finding brightly colored fruit, but the dichromats surpass them at finding insects disguised as leaves and sticks. Without a riot of colors to confuse or distract them, they’re better at detecting borders and shapes, and seeing through camouflage. Melin has watched them nabbing insects that she, a trichromat, didn’t even know were there. Seeing extra colors has both drawbacks and benefits. More isn’t necessarily better, which is why some females are still dichromats and all males 

	 To me, Sam’s silence speaks volumes. He reminds us that seeing more colors isn’t advantageous in and of itself. Colors are not inherently magical. They become magical when and if animals derive meaning from them. Some are special to us because, having inherited the ability to see them from our trichromatic ancestors, we imbued them with social significance. Conversely, there are colors that don’t matter to us at all. There are colors we cannot even 
Note: Framtiden gen od for rika som gillar tavlor

Our lenses typically block out UV, but people who have lost their lenses to surgeries or accidents can perceive UV as whitish blue. This happened to the painter Claude Monet, who lost his left lens at the age of 82. He began seeing the UV light that reflects off water lilies, and started painting them as whitish blue instead of white. Monet aside, most people can’t see UV, which probably explains why scientists were so eager to believe that the ability was rare. In fact, the opposite is true. Most animals that can see color can see UV. It’s the norm, and we are the weirdos.[*

direction perpendicular to the line of travel, but they’re sometimes confined to just one plane—imagine attaching a rope to a wall and then shaking it up and down, or side to side. This kind of light is said to be polarized, and it is common in nature. It is formed when light is scattered by water or air, or when it reflects off smooth surfaces like glass, waxy leaves, or bodies of water. Humans are largely oblivious to polarization, but most insects, crustaceans, and cephalopods can see it in much the same way that they see color. Their eyes typically have two classes of photoreceptors that are stimulated by horizontally or vertically polarized light. By comparing their two receptors, they can distinguish between light that’s polarized to different extents, or at different angles. You could call these animals dipolats.[

Guided by evolution, eyes are living paintbrushes. Flowers, frogs, fish, feathers, and fruit all show that sight affects what is seen, and that much of what we find beautiful in nature has been shaped by the vision of our fellow animals. Beauty is not only in the eye of the beholder. It arises because of that eye.


	 In a warm room that smells sweetly of corn, I’m holding a small rodent in my gloved hand. Pink and mostly hairless, it seems less like a rat or guinea pig and more like a finger that’s been soaking in a bath too long. It almost looks embryonic, even though it is a fully grown adult. Its eyes are black pinpricks. Its long incisors stick out in front of its lips. Its loose skin feels tough but is so translucent that I can make out its internal organs, including the dark outline of its liver. It is a naked mole-rat. Its appearance is the least strange thing about it.[

To be clear, the separation between nociception and pain does not make the latter any less real. People (and especially women) with chronically painful disorders have long been disbelieved and neglected by the medical establishment. They’ve been wrongly told that their suffering is just in their heads, or the result of mental health problems like anxiety. Pain is easy to dismiss in this way because it is subjective. And thanks to the unfortunate persistence of dualism—the outdated belief that the mind and body are separate—people often equate subjective with woolly, and psychological with imagined. This is harmfully wrong. It’s not the case that nociception is a physical process of the body, while pain is a psychological process of the mind. Both arise from the firing of neurons. It

That distinction “is a relic of attempts to emphasize differences between humans and other animals or between ‘higher’ and ‘lower’ animals,” wrote Donald Broom, a biologist who specializes in animal welfare. After all, in other senses, the actions of sensory receptors and the subjective experiences produced by the brain don’t get different names. Scientists who study eyes don’t get into arguments about whether humans have vision and fish merely have photoreception.

Elwood studied the common hermit crab, which frequents European beaches and tucks its soft abdomen into empty seashells. These shells are valuable property, and the crabs are vulnerable without them. But Elwood and his colleague Mirjam Appel found that they will nonetheless evacuate if given a small electric shock. These flights looked reflexive, but the crabs didn’t always flee. It took a stronger shock to force them out of their favored periwinkle shells than it did to evict them from the less desirable flat-top shells. And they were half as likely to abandon their shells if they could smell the scent of predators in the water. “That told me that this isn’t a reflex,” Elwood says. Instead, evacuation is a decision the crabs make after weighing up several sources of information.
			 The crabs also behaved differently long after the shocks. After fleeing, they wouldn’t return to their shells, despite being dangerously exposed. They groomed the part of their abdomens that got shocked. And even when

Crustaceans are the evolutionary cousins of insects and have similarly simple nervous systems. And yet, Elwood’s crabs behaved in apparently complex ways. How do we reconcile that inconsistency? If an animal’s actions don’t match what its brain is theoretically capable of, are we overinterpreting its behavior or underestimating its nervous system? Sneddon and Elwood argue that it’s the latter. Adamo would say it’s the former. And it really isn’t clear who is right, or if they all 

The evolutionary benefit of nociception is abundantly clear. It’s an alarm system that allows animals to detect things that might harm or kill them, and take steps to protect themselves. But the origin of pain, on top of that, is less obvious. What is the adaptive value of suffering? Why should nociception suck? Some scientists suggest that unpleasant emotions might have intensified and calcified the effect of nociceptive sensations, so that animals not only avoid what is currently hurting them but also learn to avoid it in the future. Nociception says, “Get away.” Pain says, “…and don’t go back.” But Adamo and others argue that animals can learn to avoid dangers perfectly well without needing subjective experiences. After all, look at what robots can do.
			 Engineers have designed robots that can behave as if they’re in pain, learn from negative experiences, or avoid artificial 

In September 2010, the European Union extended its regulations on animal research to cephalopods—the group that includes octopuses, squid, and cuttlefish. Being invertebrates, cephalopods aren’t usually covered by laws that protect the welfare of backboned lab animals like mice or monkeys. But they also have much larger nervous systems than most invertebrates—500 million neurons in an octopus, compared to 100,000 in a fruit fly.

But surprisingly, they never touched, groomed, or cradled their wounds, the way humans, rats, and even hermit crabs do. They could easily reach their stump with any of their other seven arms, but they didn’t try.
			 Even more surprisingly, Crook found that injured squid behave as if their entire bodies were sore. When humans and other mammals get cut or bruised, the damaged area is painful but the rest of the body isn’t. If I singe my hand, it hurts when I prod the burn but not when I poke my foot. But when Crook damaged one of the squid’s fins, the nociceptors on the opposite fin were just as excitable as those on the wounded side. Imagine if your entire body became delicate to the touch whenever you stubbed your toe: That’s a squid’s reality. “When they’re injured, their whole body becomes hypersensitive,” Crook tells me. “They go from being normal to this potential world of pain.” This might explain why they don’t groom their wounds. They can sense that they’ve been hurt, but they might not be able to tell where.

For mammals, the localized nature of pain allows us to protect and clean vulnerable body parts, while getting on with the rest of our lives. Why should squid lack such a useful source of information? One possibility, Crook says, “is that everything in the ocean will eat a squid.” Injured squid are especially attractive to predatory fish, either because they are more conspicuous or because they look (or smell) like easier prey. By setting their entire bodies on high alert, they might be better at evading attacks that could come from any direction.

The many debates about pain in animals often revolve around a simple question: Do they feel it? And lurking behind that question are several implicit ones. Is it okay to boil a lobster? Should I stop eating octopus? Can I go fishing?[*10] When we ask if animals can feel pain, we’re asking less about the animals themselves, and more about what we can do to them. That attitude limits our understanding of what animals actually sense.
			 There is much more to pain than its presence or absence. Shelley Adamo is right that we need to understand more about its benefits and costs. Pain does not exist for its own sake. There’s no reason why anything should hurt. Things hurt so that animals can do something with that information. And without understanding their needs and their limitations, it’s hard to interpret their behavior correctly.
			 Insects, for example, often do alarming things that seem like they should be excruciating. Rather than limping, they’ll carry on putting pressure on a crushed limb. Male praying mantises will continue mating with females that are devouring them. Caterpillars will continue munching on a leaf while parasitic wasp larvae eat them from the inside out. Cockroaches will cannibalize their own guts if given a chance. These behaviors “strongly suggest that if a pain sense is present, it is not having any adaptive influence on the behavior,” wrote Craig Eisemann and colleagues in 

Instead of focusing on whether pain even exists, we might ask, as physiologist Catherine Williams told me, “In which conditions and from which stimuli is it an advantage to have it, experience it, and display it?” And we would find that pain manifests differently in a burrowing mole-rat than in a scorpion-hunting mouse, or in a long-armed octopus than in a short-armed squid. We might possibly find different forms of pain in sociable animals that can call for help or solitary ones that must fend for themselves, or in short-lived animals that have few chances to repeat their mistakes versus long-lived ones that have many chances to. And we would certainly learn that pain can vary in animals that must tolerate extremes of temperature, from baking heat to freezing 

hibernaculum

All living things are deeply affected by temperature. If conditions are too cold, chemical reactions slow to a useless crawl. If they are too hot, proteins and other molecules of life lose their shape and fall apart. These effects constrain most of life to a Goldilocks zone where the temperature is just right. The limits of that zone vary, but they always exist, which is why every animal with a nervous system has a way of sensing and responding to temperature.
			 Animals use a variety of temperature sensors, and the most thoroughly studied of these are a group of proteins called TRP channels. They are found throughout the body on the surface of sensory neurons, where they act as tiny gates that open when they reach the right temperature. When this happens, ions enter the neurons, electrical signals travel to the brain, and we feel the sensations of hot or cold. Some TRP channels are tuned to hot temperatures, and others to cold ones. (Cold isn’t just the absence of hot; it’s a different sense in its own right.)[*2] TRP channels also respond to different severities of temperature: Some detect mild and innocuous ranges, while others fire at dangerous and painful extremes. Certain chemicals can trigger these channels as well, producing heating and cooling sensations. Chili 

burn because the capsaicin within them triggers TRPV1—a TRP channel that detects painfully high temperatures.[*3] Mint cools because it contains menthol, which activates the cold sensor called 

Such maneuvers are possible because the chitin that makes up a fly’s antennae is very good at conducting heat and because the antennae themselves are tiny. They can so quickly equilibrate with their surroundings that a fly can instantly tell if it has blundered into air that’s too hot or cold. Gallio found that it can even use its antennae as stereo thermometers to track gradients of heat, much as a dog uses its paired nostrils for odors. The fly can tell if one antenna is just 0.1°C hotter than the other, and uses those comparisons to steer toward the more comfortable temperature. When Gallio tells me about these results, I suddenly reconsider the movements of every fly I’ve ever seen. Their paths, which always seemed so random and chaotic, now take on an air of purpose, as if the insect is threading its way through an obstacle course of hot and cold that I can’t perceive, don’t care about, and oafishly wade 

	 The fly’s ability is called thermotaxis, and it’s common in the animal kingdom.[*5] Creatures big and small use their thermosensors to tell if their surroundings have become intolerable, and to gauge how the temperature around them changes as they move. Like children who are told if they’re getting warmer or colder as they approach a hidden object, most animals use changes in ambient temperature to follow the gradients of heat that are created by sunbeams and shadows, breezes and currents. But some have transformed this common ability into something rarer. They can tell if point B is hotter than point A without having to move there. They can actively seek out sources of heat from a distance.

The beetles’ spherical sensors must be extraordinarily sensitive, since the insects frequently travel to burning forests and other hot places from dozens of miles away. The Coalinga oil depot that was struck by lightning in 1925 lies in the middle of an arid, treeless region, and most of the beetles that arrived there likely came from forests that lay 80 miles to the east. Based on this distance, and simulations of the 1925 blaze, Schmitz calculated that the beetles’ pits are more sensitive than most commercial infrared detectors and on a par with state-of-the-art quantum detectors that must first be cooled with liquid nitrogen. Schmitz thinks that the pits couldn’t possibly be this sensitive on their own. The beetles must have ways of making them more responsive.
			 During flight, their beating wings create vibrations that travel into the nearby pits, shake the spherical sensors, and push the sensory neurons within to the edge of firing. It now takes much less infrared radiation to fully push them over that edge. Think of this another way: Imagine a brick that’s lying flat on its side. If a fly crashed into it, it wouldn’t budge. But if it was instead balanced on its edge, even a fly would be enough to topple it. In that state, the brick would be primed to react to a tiny amount of energy. Schmitz argues that a fire-chaser beetle’s beating wings prime its heat sensors in a similar way, setting them up to detect sources of infrared that would normally be too weak. A beetle that’s sitting on a tree would be relatively insensitive. But as soon as it takes off in search of fires, its body automatically widens its search area and transforms even faint traces of distant heat into blazing 

When zoologist Ronald Kröger got a dog—a golden retriever named Kevin—he started wondering about its nose. Sleeping dogs tend to have warm noses. But shortly after they wake up, the tips become wet and cool. Kröger found that in a warm room, a dog will keep its nose around 5°C cooler than the ambient temperature, and between 9° and 17°C 

Almost every photograph of sea otters shows them floating on their backs, often asleep, sometimes holding hands. This creates the deeply misleading impression that they are lazy and sedate. In fact, “they’re really fidgety,” Strobel tells me. “They’re constantly doing things, playing with things, wanting to touch things.” This rambunctious quality is something that sea otters share with other mustelids—the mammal group that includes weasels, ferrets, badgers, honey badgers, and wolverines. But sea otters combine what Strobel calls a “general mustelid mojo” with large size—at 3 to 5 feet in length, they’re the biggest of the group—and unusually dexterous paws. Consequently, they’re infamously hard to house in captivity.[*1] “They’re just super-destructive,” says Strobel. “They’re very curious, and the way they manifest that curiosity is: How can I break this and figure out what’s inside?”


Ruffini endings respond to tension and stretch in the skin: They help you adjust your grip, and recognize when objects slip from your grasp. Meissner corpuscles respond to slow vibrations: They produce the feelings of slip and flutter as your fingers move over surfaces, and they allow Braille readers to make sense of raised dots. Pacinian corpuscles respond to faster vibrations: They’re useful in assessing finer textures or in sensing objects through tools, like hairs that are gripped by tweezers or soil that crunches beneath a spade. Most of these receptors also exist in a sea otter’s paw or a platypus’s snout. Collectively, they produce the sensation of touch, just as our sweet, sour, bitter, salt, and umami receptors together define our sense of taste.
			 At a broad level, we understand how these mechanoreceptors work. Despite their variety, they all consist of a nerve ending enclosed in some kind of touch-sensitive capsule. A tactile stimulus bends or deforms the capsule, causing the nerve inside to fire. But exactly how this happens is still unclear, because touch is one of our least-studied senses. Compared to sight, hearing, or even smell, it inspires less art and fewer scientific devotees. Until very recently, the molecules that allow us to experience touch—the equivalent of opsins for vision, or odorant receptors for smell—remained completely mysterious. We only have a rough sense of the sense that senses roughness.
			 But touch cannot be ignored. It is a sense of intimacy and immediacy—and it varies just as much as smell or vision. Animals differ widely in how sensitive their touch organs are, what they use those organs to feel, and even the body parts on which those organs are found. And by considering how touch contributes to the Umwelten of different creatures, we will see sandy beaches, underground tunnels, and even internal organs in new 

 star-nosed mole seems to be moving as fast as its nervous system will allow, restricted only by the speed at which information can travel between the star and the brain. That trip takes just 10 milliseconds. Within the same time, visual information can’t even make it through the retina, let alone reach the brain or complete the return journey. Light may be the fastest thing in the universe, but light sensors have their limits, and the star-nosed mole’s sense of touch blows past them all. “It’s moving so fast that it’s almost getting ahead of its brain,” says Catania. He

The emerald jewel wasp also has a long, probing organ with a touch-sensitive tip, but its goals and methods are far grislier than a red knot’s. The wasp—a beautiful inch-long creature with a metallic green body and orange thighs—is a parasite that raises its young on cockroaches. When a female finds a roach, she stings it twice—once in its midsection to temporarily paralyze its legs, and a second time in its brain. The second sting targets two specific clusters of neurons and delivers venom that nullifies the roach’s desire to move, turning it into a submissive zombie. In this state, the wasp can lead the roach to her lair by its antennae, like a human walking a dog. Once there, she lays an egg on it, providing her future larva with a docile source of fresh meat. This act of mind control depends on that second sting, which the wasp must deliver to exactly the right location.

Fortunately for the wasp, her stinger is not only a drill, a venom injector, and an egg-laying tube but also a sense organ. Ram Gal and Frederic Libersat showed that its tip is covered in small bumps and pits that are sensitive to both smell and touch. With them, she can detect the distinctive feel of a roach’s brain. When Gal and Libersat removed the brain from a cockroach before offering the roach to some wasps, they repeatedly stung it, trying in vain to find the organ that was no longer there. If the missing brain was replaced with a pellet of the same consistency, the wasps stung it with the usual precision. If the replacement pellet was squishier than a typical brain, the wasps seemed confused and kept rooting around with their stingers. They know what a brain should feel like.
			 Both the wasps and their cockroach victims also use their antennae to feel their way around, as most insects do.[*8] Long, sweeping tactile organs are so useful for navigation that many species have independently evolved their own versions.[*9] Humans, ever the tool users, tap the ground in front of them with canes. The round goby, a bottom-dwelling fish, uses supersensitive pectoral fins. The whiskered auklet, a puffin-like seabird, has a large black crest that curves forward from its head, which it uses to feel the walls of the rocky crevices in which it 

Sven Dijkgraaf

Cocroft remembers his first time. He was a young student interested in animal communication and had decided to focus on treehoppers because they were obscure and understudied. In a field in Ithaca, he found a goldenrod plant that was covered in the species Publilia concava. He clipped a contact microphone onto the stem of the plant and listened through headphones. “Very shortly, I heard this woo-woo-woo-woo,” he tells me, mimicking a noise that sounds like a plaintive bullfrog. “It was a crazy sound that nobody had ever heard before, and it was right in my backyard. And that was it. I think that everyone who learns about this vibrational world can’t help but be charmed by it, but there’s a certain fraction of people who become so amazed that they have to go out and record from more species. There’s so much out there. It’s really 

Plants are strong, flexible, and springy, which makes them fantastic carriers of surface waves.[*4] Insects exploit that property, filling plants with their vibrational songs. Between treehoppers, leafhoppers, cicadas, crickets, katydids, and more, Cocroft estimates that around 200,000 species of insects communicate through surface vibrations. Their songs aren’t normally audible, and so most people are completely unaware that they exist. Those who become aware often get 

Cocroft now has a library of treehopper recordings. When he plays them to me, I’m dumbfounded. The songs are haunting, mesmerizing, and surprising. None of them sound remotely like the familiar, high-pitched chirping of crickets or cicadas, but instead sound more like birds, apes, or even machinery and musical instruments. They’re often deep and melodic, and they likely sound that way to the insects themselves. The song of Stictocephala lutea resembles a scratchy didgeridoo. Cyrtolobus gramatanus melds a hooting monkey

These vibrational songs are so strange because they’re not subject to the same physical constraints as airborne sounds. In the air, an animal’s pitch is normally tied to its size, which is why mice don’t bellow and elephants don’t squeak. That constraint doesn’t exist for surface waves, so small animals can make low-frequency vibrations that seem like they’re coming from much larger bodies. A treehopper can produce a mating call that’s as low as that of an alligator, even though the latter is millions of times heavier.
			 Airborne sounds have another limitation: They radiate outward in three dimensions, and so lose energy very quickly. Insects compensate for this by concentrating all their efforts in a narrow range of frequencies, producing simple chirps. But surface waves only have to travel along flat paths, so they retain their energy over longer distances. Insects that signal along this channel can afford to get more creative. They can produce melodic upsweeps and downsweeps, stacks of tones, and percussive backdrops. That’s why they sound more like birds.


It is surprisingly easy to tap into that extra richness, even without a laser vibrometer. In 1949, three decades before such instruments were invented, a pioneering Swedish entomologist named Frej Ossiannilsson heard the vibrations of leafhoppers by putting them on grass blades, sticking the blades in test tubes, and holding the tubes to his ear. As a trained violinist, he transcribed what he heard in musical notation. To hear them today, Cocroft simply uses a cheap speaker and a digital recorder connected to a clip-on microphone that a guitarist might use. With this kit, he spends his spare time prospecting for vibrations, miking random stems, leaves, and branches in nearby parks, or even in his backyard. Most times, he’ll hear something new. I ask him to show 

America in groups that were thousands strong, but European colonists slaughtered them in a bid to also exterminate the Indigenous peoples who depended on them. Now just 500,000 bison remain, and most are confined to private lands. Imagine how much quieter the ground is now without all those hooves and paws. Six continents that once would have thundered with the footsteps of titans now reverberate with sparse gurgles.

Never Let Me Go

Driving around the country now, I still see things that will remind me of Hailsham. I might pass the corner of a misty field, or see part of a large house in the distance as I come down the side of a valley, even a particular arrangement of poplar trees up on a hillside, and I’ll think: “Maybe that’s it! I’ve found it! This actually is  Hailsham!” Then I see it’s impossible and I go on driving, my thoughts drifting on elsewhere. In particular, there are those pavilions. 

Someone else pointed out how each time he screamed something he’d raise one foot off the ground, pointing it outwards, “like a dog doing a pee.” Actually, I’d noticed the same foot movement myself, but what had struck me was that each time he stamped the foot back down again, flecks of mud flew up around his shins. I thought again about his precious shirt, but he was too far away for me to see if he’d got much mud on it. “

But we’re talking about nine-year-old stuff, funny little lines, all misspelt, in exercise books. We’d spend our precious tokens on an exercise book full of that stuff rather than on something really nice for around our beds. If we were so keen on a person’s poetry, why didn’t we just borrow it and copy it down ourselves any old afternoon? But you remember how it was. An Exchange would come along and we’d be standing there torn between Susie K.’s poems and those giraffes Jackie used to make.” “Jackie’s giraffes,” Ruth said with a laugh. “They were so beautiful. I used to have one.” We

My guess is that from some time before he did that elephant, Tommy had had the feeling he wasn’t keeping up—that his painting in particular was like that of students much younger than him—and he’d been covering up the best he could by doing deliberately childish pictures. But after the elephant painting, the whole thing had been brought into the open, and now everyone was watching to see what he did next. It seems he did make an effort for a while, but he’d no sooner have started on something, there’d be sneers and giggles all around him. In fact, the harder he tried, the more laughable his efforts turned out. So before long Tommy had gone back to his original defence, producing work that seemed deliberately childish, work that said he couldn’t care less. From there, the thing had got deeper and deeper. For

queue. I suppose this might sound odd, but at Hailsham, the lunch queue was  one of the better places to have a private talk. It was something to do with the acoustics in the Great Hall; all the hubbub and the high ceilings meant that so long as you lowered your voices, stood quite close, and made sure your neighbours were deep in their own chat, you had a fair chance of not being overheard. In any case, we weren’t exactly spoilt for choice. “Quiet” places were often the worst, because there was always someone likely to be passing within earshot. And as soon as you looked like you were trying to sneak off for a secret talk, the whole place seemed to sense it within minutes, and you’d have no chance. So



But as I say there was surprisingly little discussion about what she’d said. If it did come up, people tended to say: “Well so what? We already knew all that.” But that had been Miss Lucy’s point exactly. We’d been “told and not told,” as she’d put it. A few years ago, when Tommy and I were going over it all again, and I reminded him of Miss Lucy’s “told and not told” idea, he came up with a theory. Tommy thought it possible the guardians had, throughout all our years at Hailsham, timed very carefully and deliberately everything they told us, so that we were always just too young to understand properly the latest piece of information. But of course we’d take it in at some level, so that before long all this stuff was there in our heads without us ever having examined it properly. It’s a bit too much like a conspiracy theory for me—I don’t think our guardians were that crafty—but there’s probably something in it. Certainly, it feels like I always  knew about donations in some vague way, even as early as six or seven. And it’s curious, when we were older and the guardians were giving us those talks, nothing came as a complete surprise. It was  like we’d heard everything somewhere before. One

.” As soon as I said this—as soon as I mentioned Madame—I realised I’d made a mistake. Ruth looked up at me and I saw something like triumph flash across her face. You see it in films sometimes, when one person’s pointing a gun at another person, and the one with the gun’s making the other one do all kinds of things. Then suddenly there’s a mistake, a tussle, and the gun’s with the second person. And the second person looks at the first person with a gleam, a kind of can’t-believe-my-luck expression that promises all kinds of vengeance. Well, that was how suddenly Ruth was looking at me, and though I’d said nothing about deferrals, I’d mentioned Madame, and I knew we’d stumbled into some new territory altogether. Ruth

That was three days after her second donation, when they finally let me in to see her in the small hours of the morning. She was in a room by herself, and it looked like they’d done everything they could for her. It had become obvious to me by then, from the way the doctors, the co-ordinator, the nurses were behaving, that they didn’t think she was going to make it. Now I took one glance at her in that hospital bed under the dull light and recognised the look on her face, which I’d seen on donors often enough before. It was like she was willing her eyes to see right inside herself, so she could patrol and marshal all the better the separate areas of pain in her body—the way, maybe, an anxious carer might rush between three or four ailing donors in different parts of the country. She was, strictly speaking, still conscious, but she wasn’t accessible to me as I stood there beside her metal bed. All the same, I pulled up a chair and sat with her hand in both of mine, squeezing whenever another flood of pain made her twist away from me. I

New atheism ... (Craig)

Modernizing the Case for God,

Things that exist necessarily exist by a necessity of their own nature. It’s impossible for them not to exist. Many mathematicians think that numbers, sets, and other mathematical entities exist in this way. They’re not caused to exist by something else; they just exist necessarily. 
 By contrast, things that are caused to exist by something else don’t exist necessarily. They exist contingently. They exist because something else has produced them. Familiar physical objects like people, planets, and galaxies belong in this category. 
 So premise 1 asserts that everything that exists can be explained in one of these two ways. 

It might be said that while premise 1 is true of everything in the universe, it is not true of the universe itself. Everything in the universe has an explanation, but the universe itself has no explanation. 

For as the nineteenth-century atheist philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer quipped, premise 1 can’t be dismissed like a taxi once you’ve arrived at your desired destination! You can’t say that everything has an explanation of its existence and then suddenly exempt the universe. It would be arbitrary to claim that the universe is the exception to the rule. (God is not an exception to premise 1: see below at 1.4.) 


 One might try to justify making the universe an exception to premise 1. Some philosophers have claimed that it’s impossible for the universe to have an explanation of its existence. For the explanation of the universe would have to be some prior state of affairs in which the universe did not yet exist. But that would be nothingness, and nothingness can’t be the explanation of anything. So the universe must just exist inexplicably. 
 This line of reasoning is, however, obviously fallacious because it assumes that the universe is all there is, that if there were no universe there would be nothing. In other words, the objection assumes that atheism is true. The objector is thus begging the question in favor of atheism, arguing in a circle. The theist will agree that the explanation of the universe must be some (explanatorily) prior state of affairs in which the universe did not exist. But that state of affairs is God and his will, not nothingness. 
 So it seems that premise 1 is more plausibly true than false, which is all we need for a good argument.


 A. If atheism is true, the universe has no explanation of its existence. 
 Since, on atheism, the universe is the ultimate reality, it just exists as a brute fact. But that is logical y equivalent to saying this: 
 B. If the universe has an explanation of its existence, then atheism is not true. 
 So you can’t affirm (A) and deny (B). But (B) is virtually synonymous with premise 2! (Just compare them.) So by saying that, given atheism, the universe has no explanation, the atheist is implicitly admitting premise 2: if the universe does have an explanation, then God exists.

. This is quite remarkable since the argument from contingency is one of the most famous arguments for God’s existence and is defended today by philosophers such as Alexander Pruss, Timothy O’Connor, Stephen Davis, Robert Koons, and Richard Swinburne, to name a few. [4

Now, fortunately, Dawkins does address this version of the cosmological argument. Remarkably, however, he doesn’t dispute either premise of the argument! Instead, he questions the theological significance of the argument’s conclusion. He complains, 
 Even if we allow the dubious luxury of arbitrarily conjuring up a terminator to an infinite regress and giving it a name, there is absolutely no reason to endow that terminator with any of the properties normally ascribed to God: omnipotence, omniscience, goodness, creativity of design, to say nothing of such human attributes as listening to prayers, forgiving sins and reading innermost thoughts. [11] 
 Apart from the opening dig, [12] this is an amazingly concessionary statement. Dawkins doesn’t deny that the argument successful y demonstrates the existence of an uncaused, beginningless, changeless, immaterial, timeless, spaceless, and unimaginably powerful, personal Creator of the 
 universe. He merely complains that this cause hasn’t been shown to be omnipotent, omniscient, good, creative of design,

that terminated the previous universe in the series. Nobody understands what goes on in singularities such as the big bang, so it is conceivable that the laws and constants are reset to new values, each time. If bang-expansion-contraction-crunch cycles have been going on forever like a cosmic accordion, we have a serial, rather than parallel, version of the multiverse. [27]

Dawkins is apparently unaware of the many difficulties of oscillatory models of the universe that have made contemporary cosmologists skeptical of them. Back in the 1960s and 1970s, some theorists proposed oscillating models of the universe in an attempt to avert the initial singularity predicted by the Standard Model. The prospects of such models were severely dimmed in 1970, however, by Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking’s formulation of the singularity theorems that bear their names. The theorems disclosed that under very generalized conditions an initial cosmological singularity is inevitable. Since it’s impossible to extend space-time through a singularity to a prior state, the Hawking-Penrose singularity theorems implied the absolute beginning of the universe. 
 Reflecting on the impact of this discovery, Hawking notes that the Hawking-Penrose singularity theorems “led to the abandonment of attempts (mainly by the Russians) to argue that there was a previous contracting phase and a non-singular bounce

Oryx and Crake: Novel

 I could perhaps like others have astonished you 
         
        with strange improbable tales; but I rather chose 
         
        to relate plain matter of fact in the simplest 
         
        manner and style; because my principal design 
         
        was to inform you, and not to amuse you.
      
       
        Jonathan Swift, 
         
        
          Gulliver’s Travels
        
      
       
       
        Was there no safety? No learning by heart of 
         
        the ways of the world? No guide, no shelter, 
         
        but all was miracle and leaping from the 
         
        pinnacle of a tower into the air?


. He can’t bring himself to eat it yet: it might be the last one he’ll ever find.

company. He scans the horizon, using his one sunglassed eye: nothing. The sea is hot metal, the sky a bleached blue, except for the hole burnt in it by the sun. 

The next day his father took him to a haircut place where there was a picture of a pretty girl in the window with pouty lips and a black T-shirt pulled down off one shoulder, glaring out through smudgy

Oh good,” he would crow. “I can’t have nothing! So I get to have something! What do I get to have?” “Jimmy, sometimes you are a pain in the ass, do you know that?” “Can I have a baby sister?” “No!” “A baby brother then? Please?” “No means no! Didn’t you hear me? I said no!” “Why not?” That was the key, that would do it. She might start crying and jump up and run out of the room, banging the door behind her, whuff. Or else she might start crying and hugging him. Or she might throw the coffee cup across the room and start yelling, “It’s all shit, it’s total shit, it’s hopeless!” She might even slap him, and then cry and hug him. It could be any combination of those things. Or it would just be the crying, with her head down on her arms. She would shake all over, gasp for breath, choking and sobbing. He wouldn’t know what to do then. He loved her so much when he made her unhappy, or else when she made him unhappy: at these moments he scarcely knew which was which. He would pat her, standing well back as with strange dogs, stretching out his hand, saying, “I’m sorry, I’m sorry.” And he was sorry, but there was more to it: he was also gloating, congratulating himself, because he’d managed to create such an effect. He was frightened, as well. There was always that knife-edge: had he gone too far? And if he had, what came 

Like, what did they mean by anything? said Jimmy. There were the conversations he’d overheard on his mini-mikes, but he didn’t want to talk about those. There were the things his mother rambled on about sometimes, about how everything was being ruined and would never be the same again, like the beach house her family had owned when she was little, the one that got washed away with the rest of the beaches and quite a few of the eastern coastal cities when the sea-level rose so quickly, and then there was that huge tidal wave, from the Canary Islands volcano. (They’d taken it in school, in the Geolonomics unit. Jimmy had found the video simulation pretty exciting.) And she used to snivel about her grandfather’s Florida grapefruit orchard that had dried up like a giant raisin when the rains had stopped coming, the same year Lake Okeechobee had shrunk to a reeking mud puddle and the Everglades had burned for three weeks straight. But everyone’s parents moaned on about stuff like that. Remember when you could drive anywhere? Remember when everyone lived in the pleeblands? Remember when you could fly anywhere in the world, without fear? Remember hamburger chains, always real beef, remember hot-dog stands? Remember before New York was New New York? Remember when voting mattered? It was all standard lunchtime hand-puppet stuff. Oh it was all so great once. Boohoo. Now I’m going into the Twinkies package. No sex tonight! His

Oscar Wilde, a study



Driftwood from 

Scandinavia

The soul is born old in the body; it is to rejuvenate the soul that the body becomes old. 

Oh,' he said to me, 'just now I am fleeing from art. I want only to adore the sun. Have you ever noticed how the sun detests thought? The sun always causes thought to withdraw itself and take refuge in the shade.

Samlade Verk. Nationalupplaga. 38. Legender

Submission

A noise recalled him to Saint-Sulpice; the choir was leaving; the church was about to close. ‘I should have tried to pray,’ he thought. ‘It would have been better than sitting here in the empty church, dreaming in my chair – but pray? I have no desire to pray. I am haunted by Catholicism, intoxicated by its atmosphere of incense and wax. I hover on its outskirts, moved to tears by its prayers, touched to the very marrow by its psalms and chants. I am thoroughly disgusted with my life, I am sick of myself but so far from changing my ways! And yet … and yet … if I am troubled in these chapels, as soon as I leave them I become unmoved and dry. In the end,’ he told himself, as he rose and followed the last ones out, shepherded by the Swiss guard, ‘in the end, my heart is hardened and smoked dry by dissipation. I am good for nothing.

The academic study of literature leads basically nowhere, as we all know, unless you happen to be an especially gifted student, in which case it prepares you for a career teaching the academic study of literature – it is, in other words, a rather farcical system that exists solely to replicate itself and yet manages to fail more than 95 per cent of the time. Still, it’s harmless, and can even have a certain marginal value. A young woman applying for a sales job at Céline or Hermès should naturally attend to her appearance above all; but a degree in literature can constitute a secondary asset, since it guarantees the employer, in the absence of any useful skills, a certain intellectual agility that could lead to professional development – besides which, literature has always carried positive connotations in the world of luxury goods.


the mediocrity of the ‘political offerings’ was almost surprising. A centre-left candidate would be elected, serve either one or two terms, depending how charismatic he was, then for obscure reasons he would fail to complete a third. When people got tired of that candidate, and the centre-left in general, we’d witness the phenomenon of democratic change, and the voters would install a candidate of the centre-right, also for one or two terms, depending on his personal appeal. Western nations took a strange pride in this system, though it amounted to little more than a power-sharing deal between two rival gangs, and they would even go to war to impose it on nations that failed to share their enthusiasm.


Cassandra is a very beautiful young maiden (‘like the golden Aphrodite’, Homer writes). Apollo, having fallen in love with her, offers her the gift of prophecy in exchange for her favours. Cassandra accepts his gift, only to refuse the god’s advances. Enraged, Apollo spits in her mouth, meaning that no one will ever understand or believe anything she says. She goes on to predict the rape of Helen by Paris, then the Trojan War, and she alerts her fellow Trojans to the ruse of the Greeks (the famous ‘Trojan Horse’) that allows them to capture the city. She winds up assassinated by Clytemnestra, but not before predicting her own murder and that of Agamemnon, who refuses to believe her. In short, Cassandra offered an example of worst-case predictions that always came true. In hindsight, the journalists of the centre-left seemed only to have repeated the blindness of the Trojans. History is full of such blindness: we see it among the intellectuals, politicians and journalists of the 1930s, all of whom were convinced that Hitler would ‘come to see reason’. It may well be impossible for people who have lived and prospered under a given social system to imagine the point of view of those who feel it offers them nothing, and who can contemplate its destruction without any particular dismay.
 But in fact, the media’s 

get when they witness a conversation between men – that odd ritual, that is neither buggery nor duel, but something inbetween.

The Bouguereau above the fireplace showed five women in a garden, some in white tunics, others half-nude, surrounding a nude infant with curly hair. One of the nude women hid her breasts with her hands. The other couldn’t – she was holding a bouquet of wild flowers. She had lovely breasts, and the artist had executed her drapery to perfection. It was little more than a century old, and that seemed so long ago that at first I felt bewildered by this incomprehensible object. Slowly, gradually, you could imagine your way into the skin of a nineteenth-century bourgeois, one of the frock-coated grandees who had commissioned the painting; you could feel, as they had, erotic stirrings before these Grecian nudes; but it was a hard, laborious climb back into the 

. There was no reason that I should be spared from grief, illness or suffering. But until now I had always hoped to depart this world without undue violence.

I’d feel kind of like a rat abandoning ship.’
 ‘Rats are intelligent mammals,’ he answered calmly, almost with amusement. ‘They will probably outlive us. Their society, at any rate, is a good deal more stable than ours.’


As soon as we hung up, I was overwhelmed by a terrible loneliness, and I knew that I’d never have the courage to call Myriam again. The feeling of closeness when we talked on the phone was too violent, and the void that came afterwards too cruel.

In a sense, all he wants is to realise de Gaulle’s dream, of France as a great Arab power, 

Have you seen Rocamadour?’ he asked all of a sudden. I was starting to nod off. I said no, I didn’t think so – or rather yes, I’d seen it on TV.
 ‘You must go – truly, you must. It’s just twenty kilometres away, and it’s one of the most famous shrines in the Christian world. Henry Plantagenet, Saint Dominique, Saint Bernard, Saint Louis, Louis the Eleventh, Philip the Fair – they all knelt at the foot of the Black Virgin, they all climbed the steps to her sanctuary on their knees, humbly praying that their sins be forgiven. At Rocamadour you’ll see what a great civilisation medieval Christendom really was.’  




The God Delusion



there exists a superhuman, supernatural intelligence who deliberately designed and created the universe and everything in it, including us.

any creative intelligence, of sufficient complexity to design anything, comes into existence only as the end product of an extended process of gradual evolution.

There is therefore nothing created, nothing subject to another in the Trinity: nor is there anything that has been added as though it once had not existed, but had entered afterwards: therefore the Father has never been without the Son, nor the Son without the Spirit: and this same Trinity is immutable and unalterable forever.


The God that Dawkins doesn’t believe in is a God that I don’t believe in either. I don’t believe in an old man in the sky with a long white beard.’ That old man is an irrelevant distraction and his beard is as tedious as it is long. Indeed, the distraction is worse than irrelevant. Its very silliness is calculated to distract attention from the fact that what the speaker really believes is not a whole lot less silly. I know you don’t believe in an old bearded man sitting on a cloud, so let’s not waste any more time on that. I am not attacking any particular version of God or gods. I am attacking God, all gods, anything and everything supernatural, wherever and whenever they have been or will be invented.


And I shall not be concerned at all with other religions such as Buddhism or Confucianism. Indeed, there is something to be said for treating these not as religions at all but as ethical systems or philosophies of life.


There is no position on which people are so immovable as their religious beliefs. There is no more powerful ally one can claim in a debate than Jesus Christ, or God, or Allah, or whatever one calls this supreme being. But like any powerful weapon, the use of God’s name on one’s behalf should be used sparingly. The religious factions that are growing throughout our land are not using their religious clout with wisdom. They are trying to force government leaders into following their position 100 percent. If you disagree with these religious groups on a particular moral issue, they complain, they threaten you with a loss of money or votes or both. I’m frankly sick and tired of the political preachers across this country telling me as a citizen that if I want to be a moral person, I must believe in A, B, C, and D. Just who do they think they are? And from where do they presume to claim the right to dictate their moral beliefs to me? And I am even more angry as a legislator who must endure the threats

of every religious group who thinks it has some God-granted right to control my vote on every roll call in the Senate. I am warning them today: I will fight them every step of the way if they try to dictate their moral convictions to all Americans in the name of conservatism.19


The establishment of the Church of England took God out of religion, but there are risks in a more vigorous approach to faith’:
 
 
 There was a time when the country vicar was a staple of the English dramatis personae. This tea-drinking, gentle eccentric, with his polished shoes and kindly manners, represented a type of religion that didn’t make non-religious people uncomfortable. He wouldn’t break into an existential sweat or press you against a wall to ask if you were saved, still less launch crusades from the pulpit or plant roadside bombs in the name of some higher power.21

. All the Founding Fathers, whatever their private religious beliefs, would have been aghast to read the journalist Robert Sherman’s report of George Bush Senior’s answer when Sherman asked him whether he recognized the equal citizenship and patriotism of Americans who are atheists: ‘No, I don’t know that atheists should be considered as citizens, nor should they be considered patriots. This is one nation under God.

’ll begin by distinguishing two kinds of agnosticism. TAP, or Temporary Agnosticism in Practice, is the legitimate fence-sitting where there really is a definite answer, one way or the other, but we so far lack the evidence to reach it (or don’t understand the evidence, or haven’t time to read the evidence, etc.). TAP would be a reasonable stance towards the Permian extinction. There is a truth out there and one day we hope to know it, though for the moment we don’t.
 But there is also a deeply inescapable kind of fence-sitting, which I shall call PAP (Permanent Agnosticism in Principle). The fact that the acronym spells a word used by that old school preacher is (almost) accidental. The PAP style of agnosticism is appropriate for questions that can never be answered, no matter how much evidence we gather, because the very idea of evidence is not applicable. The question exists on a different plane, or in a different dimension, beyond the zones where evidence can reach. An example might be that philosophical chestnut, the question whether you see red as I do. Maybe your red is my green, or something completely different from any colour that I can imagine. Philosophers cite this question as one that can never be answered, no matter what new evidence might one day become available. And some scientists and other intellectuals are convinced – too eagerly in my view – that the question of God’s existence belongs in the forever inaccessible PAP 

The view that I shall defend is very different: agnosticism about the existence of God belongs firmly in the temporary or TAP category. Either he exists or he doesn’t. It is a scientific question; one day we may know the answer, and meanwhile we can say something pretty strong about the probability.


Contrary to Huxley, I shall suggest that the existence of God is a scientific hypothesis like any other. Even if hard to test in practice, it belongs in the same TAP or temporary agnosticism box as the controversies over the Permian and Cretaceous extinctions. God’s existence or non-existence is a scientific fact about the universe, discoverable in principle if not in practice. If he existed and chose to reveal it, God himself could clinch the argument, noisily and unequivocally, in his favour. And even if God’s existence is never proved or disproved with certainty one way or the other, available evidence and reasoning may yield an estimate of probability far from 50 per cent.
 Let us, then, take the idea of a spectrum of probabilities seriously, and place human judgements about the existence of God along it, between two extremes of opposite certainty. The spectrum is continuous, but it can be represented by the following seven milestones along the way.

 PAP (permanent agnosticism in principle)

TAP (temporary agnosticism in practice).

Russell’s point is that the burden of proof rests with the believers, not the non-believers. Mine is the related point that the odds in favour of the teapot (spaghetti monster / Esmerelda and Keith / unicorn etc.) are not equal to the odds against.


As I shall argue in a moment, a universe with a creative superintendent would be a very different kind of universe from one without. Why is that not a scientific matter?


What expertise can theologians bring to deep cosmological questions that scientists cannot?

The five ‘proofs’ asserted by Thomas Aquinas in the thirteenth century don’t prove anything, and are easily – though I hesitate to say so, given his eminence – exposed as vacuous. The first three are just different ways of saying the same thing, and they can be considered together. All involve an infinite regress – the answer to a question raises a prior question, and so on ad infinitum.

Can omniscient God, who
 
 Knows the future, find
 
 The omnipotence to
 
 Change His future mind?

Arguments for God’s existence fall into two main categories, the a priori and the a posteriori. Thomas Aquinas’ five are a posteriori arguments, relying upon inspection of the world.

A great conductor is credited with saying: ‘If you have Mozart to listen to, why would you need God?’


The gospels that didn’t make it were omitted by those ecclesiastics perhaps because they included stories that were even more embarrassingly implausible than those in the four canonical ones. The Infant Gospel of Thomas, for example, has numerous anecdotes about the child Jesus abusing his magical powers in the manner of a mischievous fairy, impishly transforming his playmates into goats, or turning mud into sparrows, or giving his father a hand with the carpentry by miraculously lengthening a piece of wood.* It will be said that nobody believes crude miracle stories such as those in the Gospel of Thomas anyway.

. A designer God cannot be used to explain organized complexity because any God capable of designing anything would have to be complex enough to demand the same kind of explanation in his own right. God presents an infinite regress from which he cannot help us to escape. This argument, as I shall show in the next chapter, demonstrates that God, though not technically disprovable, is very very improbable indeed.



My brother, Sandy, a seventh-grader with a prodigy's talent for drawing, was twelve, and I, a third-grader a term ahead of himself—and an embryonic stamp collector inspired like millions of kids by the country's foremost philatelist, President Roosevelt—was seven.


At the western end of the neighborhood, the parkless end where we lived, there resided an occasional schoolteacher or pharmacist but otherwise few professionals were among our immediate neighbors and certainly none of the prosperous entrepreneurial or manufacturing families. The men worked fifty, sixty, even seventy or more hours a week; the women worked all the time, with little assistance from laborsaving devices, washing laundry, ironing shirts, mending socks, turning collars, sewing on buttons, mothproofing woolens, polishing furniture, sweeping and washing floors, washing windows, cleaning sinks, tubs, toilets, and stoves, vacuuming rugs, nursing the sick, shopping for food, cooking meals, feeding relatives, tidying closets and drawers, overseeing paint jobs and household repairs, arranging for religious observances, paying bills and keeping the family's books while simultaneously attending to their children's health, clothing, cleanliness, schooling, nutrition, conduct, birthdays, discipline, and morale. A few women labored alongside their husbands in the family-owned stores on the nearby shopping streets, assisted after school and on Saturdays by their older children, who delivered orders and tended stock and did the cleaning up

or nearly a decade Lindbergh was as great a hero in our neighborhood as he was everywhere else. The completion of his thirty-three-and-a-half-hour nonstop solo flight from Long Island to Paris in the tiny monoplane the Spirit of St. Louis even happened to coincide with the day in the spring of 1927 that my mother discovered herself to be pregnant with my older brother. As a consequence, the young aviator whose daring had thrilled America and the world and whose achievement bespoke a future of unimaginable aeronautical progress came to occupy a special niche in the gallery of family anecdotes that generate a child's first cohesive mythology.

nd since there were one-family houses selling in Union for a Depression low of a few thousand dollars, he would be able to realize an ambition he had nurtured growing up penniless in a Newark tenement flat: to become an American homeowner. "Pride of ownership" was a favorite phrase of my father's, embodying an idea real as bread to a man of his background, one having to do not with social competitiveness or conspicuous consumption but with his standing as a manly provider.

or many America Firsters there was no debating (even with the facts) Lindbergh's contention that the Jews' "greatest danger to this country lies in their large ownership and influence in our motion pictures, our press, our radio, and our government." When Lindbergh wrote proudly of "our inheritance of European blood," when he warned against "dilution by foreign races" and "the infiltration of inferior blood" (all phrases that turn up in diary entries from those years), he was recording personal convictions shared by a sizable portion of America First's rank-and-file membership as well as by a rabid constituency even more extensive than a Jew like my father, with his bitter hatred of anti-Semitism—or like my mother, with her deeply ingrained mistrust of Christians—could ever imagine to be flourishing all across Americ

anwhile my cousin Alvin, able no longer to remain in his seat, set about pacing a room eighteen-by-twelve with a force in his gait befitting an avenger out searching the city to dispose of his nemesis.

e anger that night was the real roaring forge, the furnace that takes you and twists you like steel. And it didn't subside—not while Lindbergh stood silently at the Philadelphia rostrum and heard himself being cheered once again as the nation's savior, nor when he gave the speech accepting his party's nomination and with it the mandate to keep America out of the European war. We all waited in terror to hear him repeat to the convention his malicious vilification of the Jews, but that he didn't made no difference to the mood that carried every last family on the block out into the street at nearly five in the morning. Entire families known to me previously only fully dressed in daytime clothing were wearing pajamas and nightdresses under their bathrobes and milling around in their slippers at dawn as if driven from their homes by an earthquake. But what shocked a child most was the anger, the anger of men whom I knew as lighthearted kibbitzers or silent, dutiful breadwinners who all day long unclogged drainpipes or serviced furnaces or sold apples by the pound and then in the evening looked at the paper and listened to the radio and fell asleep in the living room chair, plain people who happened to be Jews now storming about the street and cursing with no concern for propriety, abruptly thrust back into the miserable struggle from which they had believed their families extricated by the providential migration of the generation before.


O



n the sidewalk during the long vacation months we played a new game called "I Declare War," using a cheap rubber ball and a piece of chalk. With the chalk you drew a circle some five or six feet in diameter, partitioned it into as many pielike segments as there were players, and chalked into each the name of one of various foreign countries that had been in the news throughout the year. Next, each player picked "his" country and stood straddling the edge of the circle, one foot inside and one out, so that when the time came he could flee in a hurry. Meanwhile a designated player, holding the ball aloft in his hand, announced slowly, in an ominous cadence, "I—declare—war—on—" There was a suspenseful pause, and then the kid declaring war would slam the ball down, in the same instant shouting "Germany!" or "Japan!" or "Holland!" or "Italy!" or "Belgium!" or "England!" or "China!"—sometimes even shouting "America!"—and everybody would take off except the one on whom the surprise attack had been launched. His job was to catch the ball on the bounce as quickly as he could and call "Stop!" Everybody now allied against him would have to freeze in place, and the victim country would begin the counterattack, trying to eliminate one aggressor country at a time by walloping each as hard as he could with the ball, beginning by throwing at those closest to him and advancing his position with each murderous thwack.


om my side of the table you could see the photographic portraits of the family dead arranged atop the breakfront that was our memorial shrine. Framed there were two grandfathers, our maternal grandmother, a maternal aunt, and two uncles, one of them Uncle Jack, Alvin's father and my father's beloved older brother. In the aftermath of Rabbi Bengelsdorf's invoking Lindbergh's name, I was more confused than ever. A rabbi was a rabbi, but Alvin meanwhile was in a Canadian army hospital in Montreal learning to walk on an artificial left leg after having lost his own left leg battling Hitler, and in my own house—where I was supposed to wear anything except my good clothes—I had to put on my one tie and my one jacket to impress the very rabbi who helped to elect the president whose friend was Hitler. How could I not be confused, when our disgrace and our glory were one and the same? Something essential had been destroyed and lost, we were being coerced to be other than the Americans we were, and yet, by the light of the cut-glass chandelier, amid the weighty, dark-stained suite of dining room furniture, we were eating my mother's pot roast in the company of the first famous visitor we had ever entertained.

Our Umwelt is still limited; it just doesn’t feel that way. To us, it feels all-encompassing. It is all that we know, and so we easily mistake it for all there is to know. This is an illusion, and one that every animal shares.
			 We cannot sense the faint electric fields that sharks and platypuses can. We are not privy to the magnetic fields that robins and sea turtles detect. We can’t trace the invisible trail of a swimming fish the way a seal can. We can’t feel the air currents created by a buzzing fly the way a wandering spider does. Our ears cannot hear the ultrasonic calls of rodents and hummingbirds or the infrasonic calls of elephants and whales. Our eyes cannot see the infrared radiation that rattlesnakes detect or the ultraviolet light that the birds and the bees can sense.
			 Even when animals share the same senses with us, their Umwelten can be very different. There are animals that can hear sounds in what seems to us like perfect silence, see colors in what looks to us like total darkness, and sense vibrations in what feels to us like complete stillness. There

Light is just electromagnetic radiation. Sound is just waves of pressure. Smells are just small molecules. It’s not obvious that we should be able to detect any of those things, let alone convert them into electrical signals or derive from those signals the spectacle of a sunrise, or the sound of a voice, or the scent of baking bread. The senses transform the coursing chaos of the world into perceptions and experiences—things we can react to and act upon. They allow biology to tame physics. They turn stimuli into information.

The platypus’s bill is loaded with sensors that detect electric fields and sensors that are sensitive to pressure; does the platypus’s brain treat these streams of information differently, or does it wield a single sense of electrotouch?

Note: Kanner jattemkt

. I’m reminded of Hamlet’s plea to Horatio that “there are more things in heaven and Earth…than are dreamt of in your philosophy.” The quote is often taken as an appeal to embrace the supernatural. I see it rather as a call to better understand the natural. Senses that seem paranormal to us only appear this way because we are so limited and so painfully unaware of our 

As the writer Marcel Proust once said, “The only true voyage…would be not to visit strange lands but to possess other eyes…to see the hundred universes that each of them sees.”

Food and foes aside, few sources of odor are as pertinent to an elephant as other elephants. They’ll regularly inspect each other with their trunks, probing away at glands, genitals, and mouths. When African elephants reunite after a prolonged separation, they go through intense greeting rituals. Human observers can see their flapping ears and hear their throaty rumbles, but for the elephants themselves, the experience must also be olfactory pandemonium. They vigorously urinate and defecate, while aromatic liquid pours forth from glands behind their eyes, filling the air around them with scents.
			 Few people have done more to study elephant odors than Bets Rasmussen,[*20] a biochemist who was once crowned “the queen of elephant secretions, excretions and exhalations.” If an elephant produced it, Rasmussen likely sniffed it and possibly tasted

When they walk their favorite routes and encounter the smelly deposits of other elephants, what are they getting besides identity? Do they know the emotional states of those previous passers-by? Can they sense stress or diagnose illnesses? What of their wider environment? Elephants that have returned to postwar Angola seem to skirt around the millions of landmines that still dot the land—unsurprising, perhaps, given how quickly they can be trained to detect TNT. They’ve been known to dig wells in times of 

There’s hardly a place you can touch a catfish without brushing thousands of taste buds. If you lick one of them, you’ll both simultaneously taste each other.[*32] “If I were a catfish, I’d love to jump into a vat of chocolate,” John Caprio tells me. “You could taste it with your butt.”

Through their actions, cells can detect and react to the substances around them. This process is temporary: After the GPCRs are done, they either release or destroy the molecules that they’ve grabbed. But one group of them bucks this trend: opsins. They are special because they keep hold of their target molecules, and because those molecules absorb light. This is the entire basis of vision. This is how all animals see—using light-sensitive proteins that are actually modified chemical sensors.
			 In a way, we see by smelling light.

Humans are such a visual species that those of us with sight instinctively equate active eyes with an active intellect. In their flitting, darting movements, we see another curious mind investigating the world. In the case of jumping spiders, this is not unwarranted anthropomorphism. Despite their poppy-seed-sized brains, they really are surprisingly smart.[*1] The Portia species are famed for planning out strategic routes when stalking prey, or flexibly switching between sophisticated hunting tactics. The

And unlike other spiders that mostly sense the world through vibrations and touch, jumping spiders rely on vision. That’s why the eight eyes occupy up to half the volume of their large heads. They are the spiders whose Umwelten are closest to ours. In that similarity, I find affinity. I watch the spider, and it watches me back, two starkly different species connected by our dominant sense.

Look at a full, living scallop, and you’ll see a very different animal. And that animal will see you, too. Each half of a scallop’s fan-shaped shell has eyes arrayed along its inner edge—dozens in some species, and up to 200 in others. In the bay scallop, the eyes look like neon blueberries. Speiser finds them “funny and horrifying and charming,” all at once.
			 It is strange enough that scallops have eyes when most other bivalves like mussels and oysters do not. It’s even stranger that those eyes, as Mike Land showed in the 1960s, are complex. Each one sits at the end of a mobile tentacle. Each has a little pupil: “It’s wild and creepy to see all of them opening and closing at the same time,” Speiser says. Light passes through the pupil and hits the back of the scallop’s eye, where it is reflected by a curved mirror. The mirror is a precisely tiled array of square crystals that collectively focus light onto the scallop’s retinas. That’s retinas, plural. There are two per eye, and they are about as different as two animal retinas could be.[*12] Between them, they have thousands of photoreceptors, which gives them enough spatial resolution to detect small objects. “Their optics are really good,” Speiser says.[

Why do they need such a complicated eye, let alone dozens or hundreds of them? What does a scallop use its vision for? To find out, Speiser ran an experiment that he called Scallop TV. He strapped their shells to small seats, placed them in front of a monitor, and showed them computer-generated movies of small, drifting particles. It was such a ridiculous setup that no one seriously thought that it would work. But it did: If the particles were large enough and moving slowly enough, the scallops opened their shells, as if ready to feed. “It was the craziest thing I’ve ever seen,” Johnsen tells me.
			 At the time, Speiser thought that scallops must use their eyes to spot potential food. Now he thinks something else is happening. Interspersed between their eyes are tentacles that scallops use to smell molecules in the water. Speiser thinks they use smell to recognize predators like starfish and vision to detect things that are simply worth an investigative sniff. When they opened their shells in response to Scallop

My guess is that we were seeing scallops being curious,

But if that’s the case, why does each individual eye have such good resolution? Why do sophisticated components like the mirrors and double retinas exist? Why are there so many eyes when just a few could cover the entire space around the scallop’s shell? Why have such good eyes evolved in an animal whose brain can barely handle the information they convey?[*15] No one knows. “Sometimes I feel like I can almost get my mind around it, and extend my empathy into scallops,” Speiser tells me. “But a lot of the time I feel lost again.”[*16]
			 Some animals might have the scallop’s distributed vision without possessing eyes at all. The brittle star Ophiomastix wendtii looks like a skinny, spiny starfish, or perhaps like five centipedes wriggling out of a hockey puck. It doesn’t have any obvious eyes, but it clearly 

In 2012, Martin and his colleagues measured the griffon vulture’s visual field—the space around its head that its eyes can cover. They got each bird to rest its beak on a specially fitted holder, and then looked into its eyes from all directions with a visual perimeter. “It’s the same device that an optician would use when you get an eye test,” Martin told me at the time. “It’s just a question of sitting the bird down for half an hour. One tried to grab at me and I did lose a bit of my thumb.”
			 The perimeter revealed that a vulture’s visual field covers the space on either side of its head but has large blind spots above and below.

Their ultrafast hunts are guided by ultrafast vision. It may seem strange to talk about animals seeing at different speeds, because light is the fastest thing in the universe, and vision seems instantaneous to us. But eyes don’t work at light speed. It takes time for photoreceptors to react to incoming photons, and for the electrical signals they generate to travel to the brain. In killer flies, evolution has pushed these steps to their limits. When Gonzalez-Bellido shows these insects an image, it takes just 6 to 9 milliseconds for their photoreceptors to send electrical signals, for those signals to reach their brains, and for their brains to send commands to their muscles.[*22] By contrast, it takes between 30 and 60 milliseconds for human photoreceptors to accomplish just the first of those 

The eyes of a scallop are positively glacial (1 to 5 Hz), and those of nocturnal toads are slower still (0.25 to 0.5 Hz). Those of leatherback turtles (15 Hz) and harp seals (23 Hz) are faster but still sluggish. Those of swordfish aren’t much better under normal conditions (5 Hz), but these fish can heat up their eyes and brains with a special muscle, boosting the speed of their vision by eight times. Many birds have naturally fast vision; with a maximum CFF of 146 Hz, the pied flycatcher—a small songbird—has the fastest vision of any vertebrate that’s been tested, perhaps because its survival depends on tracking and catching flying insects.[*24] And those insects have eyes that are faster still. Honeybees, dragonflies, and flies have CFFs between 200 and 350 Hz.
			 It’s possible that each of these visual speeds comes with a different sense of time’s passage. Through a leatherback turtle’s eyes, the world might seem to move in time-lapse, with humans bustling about at a fly’s frenetic pace. Through a fly’s eyes, the world might seem to move in slow motion. The imperceptibly fast movements of other flies would slow to a perceptible crawl, while slow animals might not seem like they were moving at 

The blue is now almost laser-like—eerily pure and all-encompassing. Through it, silvery fish dart about. Gelatinous jellyfish and siphonophores slowly snake past. At 300 meters, it’s as dark as a moonlit night, and getting darker. Gradually, the fish get blacker, the invertebrates redder. Increasingly, they produce their own light, and their bioluminescent flashes paint the outline of your descending submersible. At 850 meters, the residual sunlight is so faint that your eyes can no longer function. At 1,000 meters, no animal eyes can. This is the beginning of the bathypelagic or midnight zone. The complex visual scenes of the surface are long gone and have been replaced by a living star-field of bioluminescence, twinkling in the otherwise total darkness. Depending on where you are in the world, there might be another 10,000 meters of ocean left to go.
			 The deep ocean

The way to think about ocean exploration is that we probably create a sphere a hundred yards wide that keeps away anything that can get away,” says Sonke Johnsen. “Most of the time, we’re seeing terror and blindness. We see how animals behave when

So when a group of these monkeys cavorts through the treetops in search of food, some will see red fruits against green leaves, while others will only see yellows and grays. Even brothers and sisters can perceive different colors.
			 It’s easy to assume that the dichromats must be at a disadvantage. But after 15 years of studying white-faced capuchins in the forests of Costa Rica, Amanda Melin thinks differently. By following several groups of these monkeys, she learned to identify every individual on sight. And by collecting their poop and sequencing their DNA, she worked out which were trichromats and which were dichromats. Neither group, she found, is more likely to survive or reproduce than the other. The trichromats are indeed better at finding brightly colored fruit, but the dichromats surpass them at finding insects disguised as leaves and sticks. Without a riot of colors to confuse or distract them, they’re better at detecting borders and shapes, and seeing through camouflage. Melin has watched them nabbing insects that she, a trichromat, didn’t even know were there. Seeing extra colors has both drawbacks and benefits. More isn’t necessarily better, which is why some females are still dichromats and all males 

	 To me, Sam’s silence speaks volumes. He reminds us that seeing more colors isn’t advantageous in and of itself. Colors are not inherently magical. They become magical when and if animals derive meaning from them. Some are special to us because, having inherited the ability to see them from our trichromatic ancestors, we imbued them with social significance. Conversely, there are colors that don’t matter to us at all. There are colors we cannot even 
Note: Framtiden gen od for rika som gillar tavlor

Our lenses typically block out UV, but people who have lost their lenses to surgeries or accidents can perceive UV as whitish blue. This happened to the painter Claude Monet, who lost his left lens at the age of 82. He began seeing the UV light that reflects off water lilies, and started painting them as whitish blue instead of white. Monet aside, most people can’t see UV, which probably explains why scientists were so eager to believe that the ability was rare. In fact, the opposite is true. Most animals that can see color can see UV. It’s the norm, and we are the weirdos.[*

direction perpendicular to the line of travel, but they’re sometimes confined to just one plane—imagine attaching a rope to a wall and then shaking it up and down, or side to side. This kind of light is said to be polarized, and it is common in nature. It is formed when light is scattered by water or air, or when it reflects off smooth surfaces like glass, waxy leaves, or bodies of water. Humans are largely oblivious to polarization, but most insects, crustaceans, and cephalopods can see it in much the same way that they see color. Their eyes typically have two classes of photoreceptors that are stimulated by horizontally or vertically polarized light. By comparing their two receptors, they can distinguish between light that’s polarized to different extents, or at different angles. You could call these animals dipolats.[

Guided by evolution, eyes are living paintbrushes. Flowers, frogs, fish, feathers, and fruit all show that sight affects what is seen, and that much of what we find beautiful in nature has been shaped by the vision of our fellow animals. Beauty is not only in the eye of the beholder. It arises because of that eye.


	 In a warm room that smells sweetly of corn, I’m holding a small rodent in my gloved hand. Pink and mostly hairless, it seems less like a rat or guinea pig and more like a finger that’s been soaking in a bath too long. It almost looks embryonic, even though it is a fully grown adult. Its eyes are black pinpricks. Its long incisors stick out in front of its lips. Its loose skin feels tough but is so translucent that I can make out its internal organs, including the dark outline of its liver. It is a naked mole-rat. Its appearance is the least strange thing about it.[

To be clear, the separation between nociception and pain does not make the latter any less real. People (and especially women) with chronically painful disorders have long been disbelieved and neglected by the medical establishment. They’ve been wrongly told that their suffering is just in their heads, or the result of mental health problems like anxiety. Pain is easy to dismiss in this way because it is subjective. And thanks to the unfortunate persistence of dualism—the outdated belief that the mind and body are separate—people often equate subjective with woolly, and psychological with imagined. This is harmfully wrong. It’s not the case that nociception is a physical process of the body, while pain is a psychological process of the mind. Both arise from the firing of neurons. It

That distinction “is a relic of attempts to emphasize differences between humans and other animals or between ‘higher’ and ‘lower’ animals,” wrote Donald Broom, a biologist who specializes in animal welfare. After all, in other senses, the actions of sensory receptors and the subjective experiences produced by the brain don’t get different names. Scientists who study eyes don’t get into arguments about whether humans have vision and fish merely have photoreception.

Elwood studied the common hermit crab, which frequents European beaches and tucks its soft abdomen into empty seashells. These shells are valuable property, and the crabs are vulnerable without them. But Elwood and his colleague Mirjam Appel found that they will nonetheless evacuate if given a small electric shock. These flights looked reflexive, but the crabs didn’t always flee. It took a stronger shock to force them out of their favored periwinkle shells than it did to evict them from the less desirable flat-top shells. And they were half as likely to abandon their shells if they could smell the scent of predators in the water. “That told me that this isn’t a reflex,” Elwood says. Instead, evacuation is a decision the crabs make after weighing up several sources of information.
			 The crabs also behaved differently long after the shocks. After fleeing, they wouldn’t return to their shells, despite being dangerously exposed. They groomed the part of their abdomens that got shocked. And even when

Crustaceans are the evolutionary cousins of insects and have similarly simple nervous systems. And yet, Elwood’s crabs behaved in apparently complex ways. How do we reconcile that inconsistency? If an animal’s actions don’t match what its brain is theoretically capable of, are we overinterpreting its behavior or underestimating its nervous system? Sneddon and Elwood argue that it’s the latter. Adamo would say it’s the former. And it really isn’t clear who is right, or if they all 

The evolutionary benefit of nociception is abundantly clear. It’s an alarm system that allows animals to detect things that might harm or kill them, and take steps to protect themselves. But the origin of pain, on top of that, is less obvious. What is the adaptive value of suffering? Why should nociception suck? Some scientists suggest that unpleasant emotions might have intensified and calcified the effect of nociceptive sensations, so that animals not only avoid what is currently hurting them but also learn to avoid it in the future. Nociception says, “Get away.” Pain says, “…and don’t go back.” But Adamo and others argue that animals can learn to avoid dangers perfectly well without needing subjective experiences. After all, look at what robots can do.
			 Engineers have designed robots that can behave as if they’re in pain, learn from negative experiences, or avoid artificial 

In September 2010, the European Union extended its regulations on animal research to cephalopods—the group that includes octopuses, squid, and cuttlefish. Being invertebrates, cephalopods aren’t usually covered by laws that protect the welfare of backboned lab animals like mice or monkeys. But they also have much larger nervous systems than most invertebrates—500 million neurons in an octopus, compared to 100,000 in a fruit fly.

But surprisingly, they never touched, groomed, or cradled their wounds, the way humans, rats, and even hermit crabs do. They could easily reach their stump with any of their other seven arms, but they didn’t try.
			 Even more surprisingly, Crook found that injured squid behave as if their entire bodies were sore. When humans and other mammals get cut or bruised, the damaged area is painful but the rest of the body isn’t. If I singe my hand, it hurts when I prod the burn but not when I poke my foot. But when Crook damaged one of the squid’s fins, the nociceptors on the opposite fin were just as excitable as those on the wounded side. Imagine if your entire body became delicate to the touch whenever you stubbed your toe: That’s a squid’s reality. “When they’re injured, their whole body becomes hypersensitive,” Crook tells me. “They go from being normal to this potential world of pain.” This might explain why they don’t groom their wounds. They can sense that they’ve been hurt, but they might not be able to tell where.

For mammals, the localized nature of pain allows us to protect and clean vulnerable body parts, while getting on with the rest of our lives. Why should squid lack such a useful source of information? One possibility, Crook says, “is that everything in the ocean will eat a squid.” Injured squid are especially attractive to predatory fish, either because they are more conspicuous or because they look (or smell) like easier prey. By setting their entire bodies on high alert, they might be better at evading attacks that could come from any direction.

The many debates about pain in animals often revolve around a simple question: Do they feel it? And lurking behind that question are several implicit ones. Is it okay to boil a lobster? Should I stop eating octopus? Can I go fishing?[*10] When we ask if animals can feel pain, we’re asking less about the animals themselves, and more about what we can do to them. That attitude limits our understanding of what animals actually sense.
			 There is much more to pain than its presence or absence. Shelley Adamo is right that we need to understand more about its benefits and costs. Pain does not exist for its own sake. There’s no reason why anything should hurt. Things hurt so that animals can do something with that information. And without understanding their needs and their limitations, it’s hard to interpret their behavior correctly.
			 Insects, for example, often do alarming things that seem like they should be excruciating. Rather than limping, they’ll carry on putting pressure on a crushed limb. Male praying mantises will continue mating with females that are devouring them. Caterpillars will continue munching on a leaf while parasitic wasp larvae eat them from the inside out. Cockroaches will cannibalize their own guts if given a chance. These behaviors “strongly suggest that if a pain sense is present, it is not having any adaptive influence on the behavior,” wrote Craig Eisemann and colleagues in 

Instead of focusing on whether pain even exists, we might ask, as physiologist Catherine Williams told me, “In which conditions and from which stimuli is it an advantage to have it, experience it, and display it?” And we would find that pain manifests differently in a burrowing mole-rat than in a scorpion-hunting mouse, or in a long-armed octopus than in a short-armed squid. We might possibly find different forms of pain in sociable animals that can call for help or solitary ones that must fend for themselves, or in short-lived animals that have few chances to repeat their mistakes versus long-lived ones that have many chances to. And we would certainly learn that pain can vary in animals that must tolerate extremes of temperature, from baking heat to freezing 

hibernaculum

All living things are deeply affected by temperature. If conditions are too cold, chemical reactions slow to a useless crawl. If they are too hot, proteins and other molecules of life lose their shape and fall apart. These effects constrain most of life to a Goldilocks zone where the temperature is just right. The limits of that zone vary, but they always exist, which is why every animal with a nervous system has a way of sensing and responding to temperature.
			 Animals use a variety of temperature sensors, and the most thoroughly studied of these are a group of proteins called TRP channels. They are found throughout the body on the surface of sensory neurons, where they act as tiny gates that open when they reach the right temperature. When this happens, ions enter the neurons, electrical signals travel to the brain, and we feel the sensations of hot or cold. Some TRP channels are tuned to hot temperatures, and others to cold ones. (Cold isn’t just the absence of hot; it’s a different sense in its own right.)[*2] TRP channels also respond to different severities of temperature: Some detect mild and innocuous ranges, while others fire at dangerous and painful extremes. Certain chemicals can trigger these channels as well, producing heating and cooling sensations. Chili 

burn because the capsaicin within them triggers TRPV1—a TRP channel that detects painfully high temperatures.[*3] Mint cools because it contains menthol, which activates the cold sensor called 

Such maneuvers are possible because the chitin that makes up a fly’s antennae is very good at conducting heat and because the antennae themselves are tiny. They can so quickly equilibrate with their surroundings that a fly can instantly tell if it has blundered into air that’s too hot or cold. Gallio found that it can even use its antennae as stereo thermometers to track gradients of heat, much as a dog uses its paired nostrils for odors. The fly can tell if one antenna is just 0.1°C hotter than the other, and uses those comparisons to steer toward the more comfortable temperature. When Gallio tells me about these results, I suddenly reconsider the movements of every fly I’ve ever seen. Their paths, which always seemed so random and chaotic, now take on an air of purpose, as if the insect is threading its way through an obstacle course of hot and cold that I can’t perceive, don’t care about, and oafishly wade 

	 The fly’s ability is called thermotaxis, and it’s common in the animal kingdom.[*5] Creatures big and small use their thermosensors to tell if their surroundings have become intolerable, and to gauge how the temperature around them changes as they move. Like children who are told if they’re getting warmer or colder as they approach a hidden object, most animals use changes in ambient temperature to follow the gradients of heat that are created by sunbeams and shadows, breezes and currents. But some have transformed this common ability into something rarer. They can tell if point B is hotter than point A without having to move there. They can actively seek out sources of heat from a distance.

The beetles’ spherical sensors must be extraordinarily sensitive, since the insects frequently travel to burning forests and other hot places from dozens of miles away. The Coalinga oil depot that was struck by lightning in 1925 lies in the middle of an arid, treeless region, and most of the beetles that arrived there likely came from forests that lay 80 miles to the east. Based on this distance, and simulations of the 1925 blaze, Schmitz calculated that the beetles’ pits are more sensitive than most commercial infrared detectors and on a par with state-of-the-art quantum detectors that must first be cooled with liquid nitrogen. Schmitz thinks that the pits couldn’t possibly be this sensitive on their own. The beetles must have ways of making them more responsive.
			 During flight, their beating wings create vibrations that travel into the nearby pits, shake the spherical sensors, and push the sensory neurons within to the edge of firing. It now takes much less infrared radiation to fully push them over that edge. Think of this another way: Imagine a brick that’s lying flat on its side. If a fly crashed into it, it wouldn’t budge. But if it was instead balanced on its edge, even a fly would be enough to topple it. In that state, the brick would be primed to react to a tiny amount of energy. Schmitz argues that a fire-chaser beetle’s beating wings prime its heat sensors in a similar way, setting them up to detect sources of infrared that would normally be too weak. A beetle that’s sitting on a tree would be relatively insensitive. But as soon as it takes off in search of fires, its body automatically widens its search area and transforms even faint traces of distant heat into blazing 

When zoologist Ronald Kröger got a dog—a golden retriever named Kevin—he started wondering about its nose. Sleeping dogs tend to have warm noses. But shortly after they wake up, the tips become wet and cool. Kröger found that in a warm room, a dog will keep its nose around 5°C cooler than the ambient temperature, and between 9° and 17°C 

Almost every photograph of sea otters shows them floating on their backs, often asleep, sometimes holding hands. This creates the deeply misleading impression that they are lazy and sedate. In fact, “they’re really fidgety,” Strobel tells me. “They’re constantly doing things, playing with things, wanting to touch things.” This rambunctious quality is something that sea otters share with other mustelids—the mammal group that includes weasels, ferrets, badgers, honey badgers, and wolverines. But sea otters combine what Strobel calls a “general mustelid mojo” with large size—at 3 to 5 feet in length, they’re the biggest of the group—and unusually dexterous paws. Consequently, they’re infamously hard to house in captivity.[*1] “They’re just super-destructive,” says Strobel. “They’re very curious, and the way they manifest that curiosity is: How can I break this and figure out what’s inside?”


Ruffini endings respond to tension and stretch in the skin: They help you adjust your grip, and recognize when objects slip from your grasp. Meissner corpuscles respond to slow vibrations: They produce the feelings of slip and flutter as your fingers move over surfaces, and they allow Braille readers to make sense of raised dots. Pacinian corpuscles respond to faster vibrations: They’re useful in assessing finer textures or in sensing objects through tools, like hairs that are gripped by tweezers or soil that crunches beneath a spade. Most of these receptors also exist in a sea otter’s paw or a platypus’s snout. Collectively, they produce the sensation of touch, just as our sweet, sour, bitter, salt, and umami receptors together define our sense of taste.
			 At a broad level, we understand how these mechanoreceptors work. Despite their variety, they all consist of a nerve ending enclosed in some kind of touch-sensitive capsule. A tactile stimulus bends or deforms the capsule, causing the nerve inside to fire. But exactly how this happens is still unclear, because touch is one of our least-studied senses. Compared to sight, hearing, or even smell, it inspires less art and fewer scientific devotees. Until very recently, the molecules that allow us to experience touch—the equivalent of opsins for vision, or odorant receptors for smell—remained completely mysterious. We only have a rough sense of the sense that senses roughness.
			 But touch cannot be ignored. It is a sense of intimacy and immediacy—and it varies just as much as smell or vision. Animals differ widely in how sensitive their touch organs are, what they use those organs to feel, and even the body parts on which those organs are found. And by considering how touch contributes to the Umwelten of different creatures, we will see sandy beaches, underground tunnels, and even internal organs in new 

