Oryx and Crake: Novel

 I could perhaps like others have astonished you 
         
        with strange improbable tales; but I rather chose 
         
        to relate plain matter of fact in the simplest 
         
        manner and style; because my principal design 
         
        was to inform you, and not to amuse you.
      
       
        Jonathan Swift, 
         
        
          Gulliver’s Travels
        
      
       
       
        Was there no safety? No learning by heart of 
         
        the ways of the world? No guide, no shelter, 
         
        but all was miracle and leaping from the 
         
        pinnacle of a tower into the air?


. He can’t bring himself to eat it yet: it might be the last one he’ll ever find.

company. He scans the horizon, using his one sunglassed eye: nothing. The sea is hot metal, the sky a bleached blue, except for the hole burnt in it by the sun. 

The next day his father took him to a haircut place where there was a picture of a pretty girl in the window with pouty lips and a black T-shirt pulled down off one shoulder, glaring out through smudgy

Oh good,” he would crow. “I can’t have nothing! So I get to have something! What do I get to have?” “Jimmy, sometimes you are a pain in the ass, do you know that?” “Can I have a baby sister?” “No!” “A baby brother then? Please?” “No means no! Didn’t you hear me? I said no!” “Why not?” That was the key, that would do it. She might start crying and jump up and run out of the room, banging the door behind her, whuff. Or else she might start crying and hugging him. Or she might throw the coffee cup across the room and start yelling, “It’s all shit, it’s total shit, it’s hopeless!” She might even slap him, and then cry and hug him. It could be any combination of those things. Or it would just be the crying, with her head down on her arms. She would shake all over, gasp for breath, choking and sobbing. He wouldn’t know what to do then. He loved her so much when he made her unhappy, or else when she made him unhappy: at these moments he scarcely knew which was which. He would pat her, standing well back as with strange dogs, stretching out his hand, saying, “I’m sorry, I’m sorry.” And he was sorry, but there was more to it: he was also gloating, congratulating himself, because he’d managed to create such an effect. He was frightened, as well. There was always that knife-edge: had he gone too far? And if he had, what came 

Like, what did they mean by anything? said Jimmy. There were the conversations he’d overheard on his mini-mikes, but he didn’t want to talk about those. There were the things his mother rambled on about sometimes, about how everything was being ruined and would never be the same again, like the beach house her family had owned when she was little, the one that got washed away with the rest of the beaches and quite a few of the eastern coastal cities when the sea-level rose so quickly, and then there was that huge tidal wave, from the Canary Islands volcano. (They’d taken it in school, in the Geolonomics unit. Jimmy had found the video simulation pretty exciting.) And she used to snivel about her grandfather’s Florida grapefruit orchard that had dried up like a giant raisin when the rains had stopped coming, the same year Lake Okeechobee had shrunk to a reeking mud puddle and the Everglades had burned for three weeks straight. But everyone’s parents moaned on about stuff like that. Remember when you could drive anywhere? Remember when everyone lived in the pleeblands? Remember when you could fly anywhere in the world, without fear? Remember hamburger chains, always real beef, remember hot-dog stands? Remember before New York was New New York? Remember when voting mattered? It was all standard lunchtime hand-puppet stuff. Oh it was all so great once. Boohoo. Now I’m going into the Twinkies package. No sex tonight! His

